To Find the Story of the Lost Children of Tuam, I Needed a Guide
A reproduction of an undated photograph of the Mother and Baby Home in Tuam, Ireland.

What is the compact between the living and the dead? Do we owe the dead a small plot of earth? A gravestone or an urn? A whispered prayer, a spray of flowers, or some other means by which we signal to the great silence that we remember?
These are among the many questions raised by a continuing scandal in Ireland that is the focus of a New York Times special report called “The Lost Children of Tuam.” Though well-known in that country, the disturbing case, involving the historic mistreatment of unwed Irish mothers and their children, is less familiar beyond Irish shores.
The scandal was exposed in 2014 by Catherine Corless, a determined woman with no press or academic credentials. At the matter’s troubled core are the deaths of nearly 800 “illegitimate” children at the since-demolished Mother and Baby Home in Tuam, County Galway, from 1925 to 1961. Institutions like the one in Tuam were created nearly a century ago to rehabilitate “fallen” women and their offspring, with management given to the Catholic Church, whose moralistic teachings dictated much of Irish life.
In March, two colleagues — Kassie Bracken, a senior video producer, and Megan Specia, a story editor for the International section — and I became intrigued by a significant development in the protracted scandal. Before long, the story of Tuam was being added to a series by The Times on how death is experienced and processed around the world.
I thought I was a natural for this story. I’ve been to Ireland many times and spent a summer there as a Times correspondent. What’s more, my mother was from a County Galway crossroads about 35 miles from Tuam. But it didn’t take long for me to be reminded, yet again, that the chasm of presumption and misunderstanding between Irish America and Ireland is as deep as the Atlantic.
Just to understand the history of the stone building that served as the mother and baby home required that I learn more about the development of mid-19th century workhouses, the local impact of the famine known as the Great Hunger, and the Irish war for independence (as well as the civil strife that followed).
But as Conall Ó Fátharta, an investigative reporter for The Irish Examiner, repeatedly told me, the case’s implications extended well beyond the eternal whereabouts of hundreds of children who died at the Tuam home. There had been other mother and baby homes around the country, all connected to what many historians say was part of a system that subjugated vulnerable women — a system that also included the notorious institutions known as the Magdalen Laundries.
And what of the children they were often forced to abandon? There were many more deaths, shadowy adoptions, medical experiments and painful marginalization. To this day, many adult “home babies” are trying to learn what happened to their mothers.
I was paralyzed: The story seemed too complex to be contained in even in an uncommonly long newspaper article. In total, I would interview about three dozen people, but still I needed someone to lead me — and the reader — through this maze of distant and modern Ireland.
Of course, she was right in front of me: Ms. Corless, that woman with no credentials, a gardener and grandmother whose determination had unearthed a troubling part of the past and forced a national reckoning.
I spent several days with the shy Ms. Corless, who patiently recounted her reporting. Tracking down archival documents and maps. Conducting dozens of interviews. Refusing to accept pat answers from those in power. Ms. Corless told me that she was motivated by the thought of all those children who deserved to be remembered. Ireland, she said, owed them at least that.
As I sat in her kitchen one day, sipping tea and eating a slice of apple tart, Ms. Corless answered a number of telephone calls from adult “home babies” now trying to track down relatives. She shared the information she had, promised to do more digging, and was, without fail, patient, even comforting.
After 35 years in journalism, all I could do was listen and learn.
A version of this article appears in print on October 29, 2017, on Page A2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Guide for Lost Children.
