Redskins need to think long term
229 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
Unless you have been living under a rock you know that the big question for the Washington Redskins is if they will sign Pro Bowl quarterback Kirk Cousins to a long-term deal. Redskins insider Lake Lewis touched on several hard-hitting points in Friday’s article on the Michigan State product.
One thing for certain is it is not a wise decision to handicap the franchise by signing Cousins to a lucrative contract that could stunt the success the Burgundy and Gold have had in putting together a talented roster.
It’s very clear for the Redskins and across the National Football League that solid quarterbacks aren’t easy to come by. But it has been proven in the past years of Redskins glory and the winning ways of other franchises around the NFL that if you build up the trenches with solid talent and depth, the wins will come.
Just look at the Minnesota Vikings and the Jacksonville Jaguars as examples of recent success. Both teams possess top 10 offensive and defensive units. Having dominant front lines reduces the chances of a teams deficiencies being exposed by the opponent especially at the quarterback position.
Washington’s offensive line has been solid and continues to get better, with a few additions to the unit they could be a dominating force for years to come. Most importantly though is the defensive front line, especially, in the middle of the unit. With the addition of a bonafide stud in the middle along with some solid rotational guys to add along with the talent they have, Greg Manusky’s unit could be on the verge of being a top ten defense.
But all these things are just good talking points around the water cooler if they overspend for a quarterback that has put up wonderful statistical numbers. Cousins has broken most if not all of the franchise’s QB records, but the most important records are wins and losses and that’s a stat that isn’t so favorable for the Holland Christian High School star.
The 2018 playoffs have shown that it’s not all contingent on quarterback play. If the Redskins continue to build on a solid foundation the structure of this team will continue to flourish. But if compromised by paying a high price for a good but not elite quarterback, it could keep the franchise at what has been its status quo of continually missing the mark.
Like this article?
Sign up for the Redskins Wire email newsletter to get our top stories in your inbox every morning
Success
 Thanks for signing up.
 You'll be waking up a little more awesome tomorrow. 
Whoa!
 Something went wrong.
