Sean McVay on Rams' pending free agents: 'Good situation to be in'
182 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
A year after being very active in free agency, the Los Angeles Rams find themselves on the other end of the glass. Last offseason, the Rams were focused on signing players from other teams: Andrew Whitworth, Robert Woods, John Sullivan.
Now, they’re faced with some huge decisions regarding their own pending free agents. Sammy Watkins, Trumaine Johnson and Lamarcus Joyner headline Los Angeles’ lengthy list of players set to hit the open market, which means the roster could look very different in 2018.
A total of six starters will have their contracts expire this offseason, but Sean McVay isn’t panicking. He actually views it as a “good situation” to be in, for some reason.
“These are positive problems, to have so many great players that did a lot of good things this past year,” McVay said on ESPN Radio. “We’re gonna have to make some tough decisions, but it’s a good situation to be in because of the production these players had where their contracts are up.”
In addition to Watkins, Joyner and Johnson, the Rams could see Connor Barwin, Nickell Robey-Coleman and Sullivan all leave in free agency. It’s unlikely Los Angeles lets all of them walk, but given their contract situations, it’s entirely possible.

Robert Hanashiro-USA TODAY Sports
Losing even half of those six players would be a significant blow, considering how large of a role each guy played this past season.
“We’re always mindful of making those [decisions], and I think you always want to start by taking care of your own,” McVay said. “But also be aware of, ‘What does the free agency market look like? What does the draft in terms of depth look like?’ And that’s where the coaching staff and personnel being in alignment, you can make sound decisions based on all the factors included.”
McVay praised the Rams’ current structure with regards to their decision making, involving everyone in the process – from Les Snead to McVay, himself.
Whether the Rams are in a good situation, however, is up for debate. It’s never a good thing to have six starters set to watch their contracts expire, even if it is a testament to how well they played the previous year.
There’s no doubt the Rams will work extremely hard to retain all six players, but they also have to deal with the fact that Mark Barron and Robert Quinn could both be cut, and Aaron Donald needs a contract extension.
Like this article?
Sign up for the Rams Wire email newsletter to get our top stories in your inbox every morning
Success
 Thanks for signing up.
 You'll be waking up a little more awesome tomorrow. 
Whoa!
 Something went wrong.
