This is why the mystery of Amelia Earhart endures 80 years later
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated the date Earhart disappeared.
Eighty years ago Amelia Earhart disappeared during the last leg of her quest to fly around the world. 
Although decades have passed since her last radio call on July 2, 1937, the mystery of her disappearance has captivated the minds of many. After she vanished, the United States government conducted its largest ever search for a lost aircraft, but turned up empty-handed.
Today the search continues. A team of researchers is using bone-sniffing dogs in hopes of finding her remains on a remote Pacific island, where they believe she may have died as a castaway. 
While many pilots disappeared without a trace at the time, Earhart's disappearance was never forgotten, in part because of her mass celebrity during her lifetime, according to Dorothy Cochrane, a curator in the general aviation aeronautics department at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum. 
"She was one of the largest figures in celebrity status in the country at the time, her name was known by everyone," Cochrane said. 
Earhart launched her aviation career in 1928, when she was approached by New York publisher George Palmer Putnam and asked if she wanted to be the first woman to fly across the Atlantic Ocean. Earhart, who was a social worker and flew in her spare time, said yes, but later noted that she was just a passenger on the trip, keeping the log and not actually flying the plane. 
In 1932, she got her chance in the pilot's seat, when she flew across the Atlantic. Her journey marked the first time a woman had ever achieved the feat.
"She had a lot of courage and dared to be different at a time when women didn't have many opportunities," Cochrane said. "She made her way in a man’s world, and made her own career and used this success and hard work to encourage others." 

Earhart later married Putnam, who managed her career and was a "public relations genius," according to Ric Gillespie, executive director of The International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery (TIGHAR). He said Putnam ensured that every record-breaking flight or stunt that Earhart did was heavily covered by the press. 
"Earhart was the perfect public representative for promoting aviation because she was a woman, she was articulate, and to beat it all, her name was Amelia Earhart; she was born with a stage name," he said. 

 Amelia Earhart in front of her bi-plane called "Friendship" in Newfoundland, June 14, 1928. Getty Images
People wondered whether she was captured by the Japanese, or if she simply was tired of the fame and slunk off to live her life in anonymity. While the U.S. government concluded that she ran out of gas and crashed into the sea somewhere near Howland Island in the Pacific Ocean, TIGHAR believes they have evidence that she may have died as a castaway on a remote Pacific island. 
(TIGHAR) along with four human-remains-detection dogs, are investigating whether Earhart may have landed on the uninhabited island of Nikumaroro. 
The group hopes to find bones, which could prove whether the theory is correct once and for all. Even if DNA analysis proves their theory is correct, people will likely still hold on to whatever theory they believe about Earhart's disappearance, according to Gillespie, who wrote Finding Amelia: The True Story of the Earhart Disappearance.
"It's such an iconic mystery, and people hold on to that mystery," he said. "They love the mystery."
While Cochrane sides with the U.S. government on what happened to Earhart, she said Earhart's spirit and message of perseverance "still resonate today." 
So, why do we want to know what happened to her? 
Because she showed generations that anything is possible, Cochrane said. 
Follow Mary Bowerman on Twitter: @MaryBowerman 

CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2u6fYg8
