Flawed coverage fans flames of racial strife: Your Say
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Letter edited for clarity and grammar: 
USA TODAY's article on high-speed chases continues to fan the flames of racial strife in America, often using flawed assumptions.
The story continually cites isolated incidents only to arrive at inconclusive evidence of racial bias, often citing needed additional research.
More alarming is the reference to an assumed racial imbalance in police shootings, implying that an overwhelming number of white officers are shooting blacks, when this notion has been debunked.
A study released this year by the prize winning Harvard professor Roland Fryer (who is black) did not find any racial disparities in police shootings. In his study of over 1,000 shootings and what he called the “most surprising result of my career,” the professor found no racial bias in police shootings involving civilians.
Many police chases that end in death begin over minor, non-violent offenses. pic.twitter.com/MaFp8Kb8Rz
— USA TODAY (@USATODAY) December 2, 2016
The idea that police would decide to engage in a high-speed chase in a neighborhood of color over one that is not of color is preposterous. This would assume that the officer values his own safety and life less in a black neighborhood than in a non-black neighborhood.
These attention grabbing headlines are ill conceived, and only continue to further our racial divide.
Michael Martin; Greer, S.C.
Facebook comments and tweets are edited for clarity and grammar: 
@USATODAY Then don't flee the police. Obey the laws. How about this: More white people die in the knockout game than all other races total.
— Chris Renegar (@luvreagan) December 2, 2016
Lord Jesus! They are running because they don't feel safe anymore. Even when you are seat belted in you are still shot. Not all cops are bad, but the bad ones make them all look bad. If cops stood up against this then blacks would feel safer.
— Kellie Einemo
If you have nothing to hide, you just pullover don’t you? Black, white, tan, all the same.
— Bill Roberts
@USATODAY This is the dishonest media trying to promote racism in an attempt to increase ratings.
— Slowik (@SlowLaneLodge) December 2, 2016
The police are not to blame, but that doesn't change the fact that they do have the ability to influence outcomes. That's why there are policies against engaging in high speed pursuits unless the suspect poses a serious threat. (Shoplifting, one of the incidents described in the USA TODAY investigation, isn't a serious threat).
— Will Himmler 
Always two sides to a story. Not all blacks are victims and not all cops are bad people.
— Clyde Staskunas
@USATODAY then pull over, don't argue, put your hands where they can see them and if you don't agree then you can go to the station later.
— Auntie Kiki (@KikiandtheBear) December 2, 2016
People make choices. The police also have choices to make. They get trained to handle situations and to find the safest possible solution to safeguard the public. Stupid people, like thieves, will make stupid choices. But the police could have handled that differently. They are not supposed to act or react in a way that disregards the public's well-being.
— Hercules Rodz
Tell us about your experiences
Want to share your views on police and policing? Have some information to give about what's happening in your community? Tell us! Call the Policing the USA hotline at 540-739-2928 and leave a message detailing your experiences and observations about the cops in your neighborhood. You can also share your experiences and send a photo using #policingtheusa on Twitter. Send us a letter at letters@usatoday.com. We want to hear from you!
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2h7Zosd
