Reforms have focused on community policing and accountability — but that may not be enough - Police shootings and brutality in the US: 9 things you should know
Card 1 of 9
 American police shoot and kill far more people than their peers in other countries
Card 2 of 9
 There are huge racial disparities in how US police use force
Card 3 of 9
 Cities across the country have been riddled with accusations of police abuse
Card 4 of 9
 There's no good data on how many people police kill each year
Card 5 of 9
 Police can use deadly force if they merely perceive a threat
Card 6 of 9
 Cops are almost never prosecuted and convicted for use of force
Card 7 of 9
 Killings of police officers on duty are near record lows
Card 8 of 9
 The federal government has helped the militarization of police
Card 9 of 9
 Reforms have focused on community policing and accountability — but that may not be enough
 Facing protests and federal pressure, police departments across the country have started to undertake reforms to build trust and stronger ties with their communities through transparency and accountability.
 Camden, New Jersey, has earned widespread praise for seeing its rates of violent crime, murder, and shootings fall after it disbanded its police force and built a new one focused on community policing. The idea is that these community-focused tactics — in which the police work with community groups, such as churches, to guide their priorities — can dismantle the us-versus-them mentality between police and residents in some places, and build a stronger police presence that's more familiar with locals and, as a result, less likely to resort to force to settle disputes.
 In Cleveland, the local government agreed to reforms following a federal investigation of the police department that found a pattern of excessive use of force. As part of the changes, the city will establish a commission that will act as a link between the police department and community groups, as well as new use-of-force guidelines, improved training, and more oversight through strengthened watchdog agencies, an appointed civilian to head the internal affairs unit, and a new inspector general that will watch over cops. More specifically, police officers will also be required to stop pistol whipping people in the head, and document each time they unholster their guns.
 
 Other reformers, including the Obama administration, have pushed police-worn body cameras, which could help hold law enforcement accountable and deter excessive use of force by recording most or all their actions.
 Recording the police proved its worth time and time again in 2015. After the police shootings of Walter Scott in North Charleston, South Carolina, and Samuel DuBose in Cincinnati, video footage of the shootings proved that police lied and exaggerated in their accounts of the events. Without such footage, prosecutors and juries may have been left to the whims of police accounts to decide whether the officers involved should be punished, and the cops may have gotten away with no criminal charges. With the footage, it was much more plausible that the cops did something wrong, and they were charged accordingly.
 Still, critics worry these types of reforms won't be enough until the law dictating use of force changes. The problem is rooted in two issues: Police are allowed to use deadly force when they reasonably perceive a threat, but they may be more likely to perceive a threat against black suspects due to underlying racial biases.
 A growing body of research has found that subconscious racial biases may make police more likely to shoot and kill black men. For example, studies by Josh Correll, a University of Colorado Boulder psychology professor, show that officers are quicker to shoot black suspects in video game simulations.
 At the same time, two Supreme Court rulings in the 1980s established legal guidelines that allow police to use deadly force when they reasonably perceive a threat, even if a threat isn't actually present. Police and their supporters say this loose legal standard is necessary so cops don't hesitate during split-second decisions and get hurt or killed. But it's been knocked by critics of police, who say the standard gives cops a license to kill innocent or unarmed people.
 So police are only required to reasonably perceive a threat to use deadly force, but, based on the research, the threat they perceive may be more about race than about whether a suspect is really carrying a gun. The only way to fix that conflict may be to make it more difficult for police to legally use force, or to find a way to curtail and control subconscious racial biases. In that context, reforms focused on community policing or body cameras may not go far enough.
