Today’s Top Supply Chain and Logistics News From WSJ
The cybersecurity hack against A.P. Moeller-Maersk  AMKBY 3.98%  A/S hit operations at the world’s biggest container-ship operator in a single flash but the business is still recovering nearly a week later. Maersk Chief Operating Officer Vincent Clerc tells the WSJ’s Costas Paris that computer screens suddenly “went blank,” as systems from email to cargo booking and APM Terminals operations in the U.S., Europe and India shut down. One early decision in the cyberattack proved critical: Maersk pulled the plug on its entire system once it realized it was under siege, opting not to trigger a backup system because it feared the backup could also be infected. The company says its operations are largely running today but that cargo handling and booking in some areas aren’t up to normal speed. Maersk expects various areas to come back online this week even as the carrier, and the rest of the shipping industry, assesses safeguards against such attacks in the future. 
 Shortages of some low-cost but critical medicines are hitting U.S. health-care supply chains, raising overall costs and treatment risks. The latest scarcity is sterile talc powder, a relatively simple medicine used to treat a serious lung problem affecting 150,000 Americans, the WSJ’s Peter Loftus reports, one of dozens of shortages in some medical products causing problems in the U.S. In this case, supplies of sterile talc have dwindled because of a production problem at the only U.S. supplier, Lymol Medical, which relies on a single contract manufacturer. That’s a recipe for greater supply-chain risk, and in fact studies say similar problems across U.S. medical businesses have triggered chronic drug shortages. That adds more than $400 million in annual health-care costs as hospitals and doctors seek more expensive alternatives. One cause is basic economics: companies face thinner profit margins for older, low-cost drugs and so have less incentive to invest in production.
 Upheaval in retail trade is bringing a new lineup of suppliers to the forefront. In the midst of a broader reset of its business, Target Corp. is cleaning house in its apparel and home furnishings segments, shedding some stalwart brands and launching more than a dozen new ones over the next 18 months. Faced with slumping sales and stiff competition from rivals—most prominently Amazon.com Inc. —Target is trying to tap broader consumer trends toward niche brands, the WSJ’s Elizabeth Holmes writes, with distinctive personality beyond the mass-market mainstream. That’s similar to the moves Wal-Mart Stores Inc. has made with its recent acquisitions of niche online sellers including Bonobos and Moosejaw. In this case, however, Target is hoping fresh clothing and furnishings launches will drive more traffic to stores. Blending that business with online fulfillment won’t get easier, and Target still faces challenges in managing inventory even as it bets that brands still matter for retailers and customers. 
ECONOMY & TRADE

 The Port of Rotterdam. Photo: Bloomberg News 
 The Trump administration is moving to renegotiate the five-year-old trade deal with South Korea even as other countries move to set new trading ties around the Asia-Pacific region. President Donald Trump highlighted his call for a new pact in a meeting with South Korea’s president, the WSJ’s Carol E. Lee, William Mauldin and Eli Stokols write, calling the existing agreement “a rough deal for the United States.” The focus on Seoul is part of the White House’s larger attempt to review bilateral trade pacts after pulling the U.S. out of the sweeping Trans-Pacific Partnership. Several TPP participants also are moving on with new pacts that would unwind tariffs and open new international markets. Australia and New Zealand have started free-trade talks with the Pacific Alliance of Mexico, Chile, Peru and Colombia. The WSJ’s Robb M. Stewart reports Australia wants to open markets for beef and minerals. And Japan and the European Union say they are nearing a new trade deal, the WSJ’s Laurence Norman and Alastair Gale report, and could announce a pact this week if they can overcome critical final hurdles. 
 WSJ Logistics Report won’t publish on Tuesday because of the Fourth of July holiday, and will resume publishing on Wednesday, July 5. 
QUOTABLE
 ‘Screens went blank, the whole network was hit in a few minutes. ’ 
Number of the Day
5.6
Decline in value of the U.S. dollar in the first six months of this year, the worst run for the currency in six years. 
IN OTHER NEWS
The Rockefeller Group plans to build a 2.2 million-square-foot logistics center in Piscataway, N.J., targeting the booming e-commerce-fueled industrial real estate market. (WSJ)
China’s official measure of manufacturing output expanded in June on growing domestic and international demand. (WSJ) 
Business confidence among Japan’s large manufacturers strengthened to its highest level in more than three years in the second quarter. (WSJ) 
U.S. consumer confidence rose slightly in June after two straight months of decline. (WSJ) 
Oil prices have risen for seven straight days since reports of a drop in U.S. production. (WSJ) 
British households suffered the longest sustained decline in disposable income in over four decades in the nine months through March. (WSJ) 
Canada’s economic output expanded 0.2% in April, the sixth straight monthly gain. (WSJ) 
Analysts say copper prices may pull back now that hopes for infrastructure spending that drew in investors are fading. (WSJ) 
France’s Total SA expects to complete a $1 billion investment in a giant Iranian gas field, the first big move by a Western oil company into the country in years. (WSJ)
The Odebrecht family that owns Latin America’s largest construction group plans to relinquish its grip on the board and turn all the firm’s Brazilian businesses public. (WSJ) 
The White House dropped plans to require all American food aid be transported on U.S.-flagged ships. (Reuters)
CMA CGM SA will sell a 90% stake in the Global Gateway South container terminal at the Port of Los Angeles to Sweden’s EQT Infrastructure III Fund for $817 million. (Seatrade Maritime) 
The European Commission gave unconditional approval to the merger of Japan’s big three container lines. (Port Technology) 
Amazon will open an 850,000-square-foot warehouse on the north side of Miami, its first big distribution center in South Florida. (Miami Herald)
Chinese grocery delivery startups using brick-and-mortar stores to serve online orders are showing strong growth. (Nikkei Asian Review) 
U.S.-listed shipping companies are building up fleets, spending $4.47 billion to acquire 119 vessels in the first half of 2017. (IHS Fairplay) 
Companies including ship owners and operators joined an International Maritime Organization effort aimed at reducing carbon output in shipping. (American Shipper) 
 McCormick & Co. Inc. is seeing near-triple digit growth in online sales of its spices and seasonings. (Business Journals) 
U.S. freight shipments rose 7.1% year-over-year in May, pushing the Cass Freight Index to its highest level since August 2014. (Logistics Management) 
A study shows highway congestion in central Texas is growing as freight shipping and logistics operations expand. (Temple Daily Telegram) 
U.K. vehicle carrier BCA Automotive says it has cut its costs sharply by switching to a hub-and-spoke road network. (Motor Transport) 
U.S. regional passenger airline Horizon Air is dropping more than 300 flights this summer because it can’t bring in pilots fast enough. (Seattle Times) 
ABOUT US
Paul Page is deputy editor of WSJ Logistics Report. Follow him at @PaulPage, and follow the entire WSJ Logistics Report team: @brianjbaskin, @jensmithWSJ and @EEPhillips_WSJ. Follow the WSJ Logistics Report on Twitter at @WSJLogistics.
 Write to Paul Page at paul.page@wsj.com
