11 Weighted Blankets That Won't Weigh Down Your Wallet
If you’re a troubled sleeper, you’ve probably heard of the newest insomnia-fighting trend: weighted blankets.
Weighted blankets are just what they sound like ― blankets that are heavier than your average bedding. But, how exactly does a 25-pound blanket help you sleep better?
Most weighted blankets have pellets sewn into pockets of the lining to give them their bulk, usually between 10 and 25 pounds. The blanket’s pressure is evenly distributed across your body, which some research suggests can provide anxiety and stress relief for those with sleep problems.
The feeling of a weighted blanket is supposed to mimic the pressure of being hugged or held, which is why weighted blankets have been used for years in occupational therapy, particularly for kids with autism. 
So, how heavy should your weighted blanket be to get a good night’s sleep? Experts recommend that your blanket should weight about 10 percent of your body weight, but be sure to consult your doctor before using one.
If you’re eager to get your hands on weighted blanket, we’ve pulled together a list of some of the best weighted blankets for under $200. Take a look below to find the best blanket for your best night’s sleep: 
 1 This cute handmade weighted blanket on Etsy 
 

 
 Etsy // Soren by Angelique 
 Select your preferred blanket weight at checkout, which ranges from 10 pounds to 22 pounds. Prices start at $125. Get it here. 
 
 
 2 This "Sleep Tight" weighted blanket from Brookstone 
 

 
 Brookstone 
 Ranges in weights from 5 pounds to 25 pounds. Prices start at $130. Get it here. 
 
 
 3 This handmade weighted blanket for adults on Etsy 
 

 
 Etsy // My3BoysDesigns 
 Select your preferred blanket weight at checkout, which ranges from 10 pounds to 30 pounds. Prices start at $125. Get it here.
 
 
 4 This 12-pound minky dotted cover weighted blanket on Amazon 
 

 
 Amazon 
 Prices start at $190. Get it here. 
 
 
 5 This 15-pound dark gray weighted blanket by Weighted Idea 
 

 
 Amazon 
 Prices start at $160. Get it here. 
 
 
 6 This Brookstone weighted blanket on Bed Bath and Beyond 
 

 
 Bed Bath and Beyond 
 Prices start at $150. Get it here. 
 
 
 7 This luxurious minky weighted blanket on Etsy 
 

 
 Etsy // Komfy Couture 
 Select the size and weight of your blanket at checkout, which ranges from 5 pounds to 30 pounds. Prices start at $130. Get it here.
 
 
 8 This charcoal weighted blanket from Weighting Comforts 
 

 
 Weighting Comforts 
 Though, unfortunately, it looks like most of their inventory is backordered right now. But that doesn't mean you can't still go ahead and place your order for when they're back in stock. Ranges from 10 pounds to 20 punds. Prices start at $195. Get it here. 
 
 
 9 This brushed denim cotton blanket from Mosaic Weighted Blankets 
 

 
 Mosaic Weighted Blankets 
 Prices start at $95. Get it here. 
 
 
 10 This 20-pound cotton weighted blanket on Amazon 
 

 
 Amazon 
 Prices start at $190. Get it here. 
 
 
 11 This 15-pound weighted blanket on Amazon 
 

 
 Amazon 
 Prices start at $175. Get it here.
