How To Get Rid Of Negative Energy In Your Home
Home is where we feel safest and most secure, so it's no surprise we tend to unload a lot of our emotional baggage within its walls.
Any time we experience strong emotion, it can affect our environment, according to Amy B. Scher, a trained energy therapist and author of "How to Heal Yourself When No One Else Can." 
"Experiences of getting shocking news, a family argument, feeling scared or helpless and other times we have a big emotional experience can linger," says Scher. "The energy of our homes often reflect our own inner emotional state. So whatever events you haven't let go of, it's likely your home is hanging on, too."
Scher uses energy therapy techniques, such as metaphor healing and the Universal Law of Attraction, to assist clients in understanding how their inner emotions affect their surroundings. While research published on the effects of such healing practices on one's well-being is sparse, Scher believes the power of energy healing has a lot to do with intuition.
Ready to clear your home of negative vibes and create a positive space? Below are five simple ways to carry out the energy cleansing process in your home. 
1. "Shoo" negative energy straight out the window.

"Use your intention to help usher that energy out," says Scher.

A technique that Scher swears by for first-timers is to simply open the windows and use your hands, a broom or large poster-type board to "swish" or "shoo" the energy. She explains, "Use your intention to help usher that energy out. You can even imagine it all leaving your house."
2. Scatter black tourmaline throughout your home.

Setting black tourmaline crystals throughout your home helps to absorb negative energy.

"I love black tourmaline," says Scher. "This crystal is very inexpensive and acts like a sponge to absorb negativity and offer protection." She recommends scattering them all over, especially around electronics because they tend to create chaotic energy in a home.
3. Use houseplants or small bouquets to keep the energy clear.

Houseplants are a simple way to keep the energy in your home clear.

Any houseplant can be helpful in keeping energy clear, according to Scher. "Plants, by nature, are beneficial for the environment. Specific plants that I feel have an extra cleansing affect [are] lavender, eucalyptus, white sage," she said. Set the entire plant in your living room or place small bouquets in fresh water in individual rooms.
4. Spritz room cleansing sprays or burn incense to increase positive feelings.

The smoke from sage or incense can be clearing, according to Scher.

Sage, rose, lavender, frankincense and patchouli are among fragrances that are said to be specific for energy cleansing, but Scher believes that choosing a scent you enjoy will be most effective for your own environment. 
She suggests taking a clean spray bottle and adding a few cups of water along with a few drops of your favorite essential oil. Lighting incense is another option as the smoke can be clearing.
5. Move around your furniture to shift how you feel emotionally. 

Forget the "rules" of feng shui and arrange your furniture until it feels right to you.

"Feng shui is an ancient system of harmonizing and balancing an environment's energy by specific arrangement or placement of items," says Scher. "While there are rules of feng shui, I've found because we each have our own unique energy system, we can relate to our spaces very differently."
With that in mind, Scher advises slightly changing things around and observing if that shifts how you feel emotionally. She adds, "Sometimes turning a couch to face a specific direction can make you feel calmer or more secure, even though there is no logical explanation for it."
When embarking on an energy cleansing journey, remember this major takeaway from Scher: "Whatever you may be struggling with as far as old hurts, negative thinking patterns and stuck emotions, they must be dealt with to optimize your wellbeing and home environment."
