Food As Medicine, The Blood Type Diet And The Ketogenic Diet
I am so excited to share my new and improved House Call series with you. Instead of focusing on one submitted question per week, we’ll cover two to three questions submitted via video, Twitter, Facebook or Instagram!
Have you heard of the concept of food as medicine? Have you ever wondered about the Blood Type Diet or the Ketogenic Diet? These are the topics that we will cover on this week’s House Call.
*Below, I have included some key takeaways from this week’s video.*
Food As Medicine
Our first question comes from Chrysanne who asks, “Is it really worth it to spend extra money on good food? Does it make a difference?”
The food industry likes to trick us into thinking that eating healthy is expensive, but this is far from the truth. My friends at the Environmental Working Group created an easy-to-use, comprehensive guide, called Good Food on a Tight Budget, to help consumers make the best food choices without breaking the bank.
When people tell me they cannot afford organic produce or healthy cuts of meat, I ask them to consider the gargantuan markup of many convenience foods. Manufacturers package them in “value-priced jumbo sized” containers, and grocery stores promote them with price cuts to create the illusion that we are getting value.
Relying on inexpensive, overly processed food is tempting, given our demanding lifestyles and schedules, but the cost to our health is quite large. Feasting on the sodium, fat and sugar bombs disguised as food can lead to serious diseases that cost hundreds of dollars in doctor’s visits and prescription drugs.
Food is not just calories; food is information. I’ve seen thousands of people transform simply by changing their diet, so why not give it a shot? You will only feel better. Here are my tips for eating well on a tight budget.
The Blood Type Diet
Our next question comes from Jenna who asks, “Eating for your blood type advocates say that those with O blood type shouldn’t eat anything with coconut, but it’s so good for you. What are your thoughts on this?”
I believe in the personalization of our diets. We are learning more and more about how to customize diets for every individual based on their genetics, metabolic type and more. The blood type diet was one of the first customizable diets, but it only focuses on one bit of information: your blood type.
Instead, I recommend looking at the whole picture. When I see a patient, I look at their genetics, predisposition to diabetes, food intolerances, detoxification symptoms and other factors.
My hope is that in five years or less, we will be able to customize our diets based on a simple drop of blood. But until then, my advice is to look at the whole picture instead of just one factor. You can do this by working with a Functional Medicine practitioner who can test you for food intolerances, check out the state of your gut, identify nutritional deficiencies among other factors, to give you a complete picture of the state of your body. From there, they can create a plan to customize your diet to get you back on track and optimize your nutritional intake.
Also, you know your body better than anyone else. If coconut oil works for you, use it. The smartest doctor in the whole room is your own body. Take note of how you feel after you eat certain foods. If you dig a bit deeper, you can find out what works for you and what doesn’t.
The Ketogenic Diet
Our final question comes from Deanna who asks, “Is there such a thing as a vegetarian or a vegan ketogenic diet?”
I’m not going to lie to you, it is absolutely tougher to be vegan or vegetarian on a ketogenic diet, but it is possible.
You need to focus on two important groups to maintain a vegetarian ketogenic diet: proteins and fats. In fact, studies have shown that a low-carb vegan diet with higher amounts of plant-based fats and proteins has advantages over a high-carb, low-fat diet – including increased weight loss and improvement in heart disease risk factors.
Sources of vegetarian protein include:
Tofu and tempeh
Nuts and seeds
Eggs (if you’re not vegan)
Sources of plant-based fats:
Organic extra-virgin olive oil
Organic virgin coconut oil
Macadamia nut oil
Avocado oil
Grass-fed ghee (if you’re not vegan)
Avocados
Olives
Here’s an easy guide to a vegan ketogenic diet.
Now I want to hear from you! Have you experimented with the Blood Type Diet or the Ketogenic Diet? What are your thoughts on food as medicine? Is healthy food worth the cost? Post your thoughts on my Facebook page, and if you liked this video, please share it with your friends and family on Facebook or Twitter. And, if you have any questions, we want to hear from you! Tweet me your questions or submit them by video to support@drhyman.com, and maybe next week, I’ll make a house call to you!
Wishing you health and happiness,
Mark Hyman, MD
