How to Cope With Seasonal Affective Disorder
Commuters in Bristol were being challenged to dress brightly at the start of next week in a bid to combat ‘“blue Monday.” Credit Don Ryan/Associated Press

It happens every year, and every year, it’s a shock to the system. Nature throws itself one last party, festooning every tree in a crisp blaze of glory. After we’ve digested the last of the spiced cider, after the pumpkins have gone soft, the long, dark days of winter descend. In much of the Northern Hemisphere, December through March brings blustery cold that makes dreary days feel as if we’ve been banished to Siberia. Sound dramatic? Probably not to the roughly 6 percent of Americans suffering from Seasonal Affective Disorder.
Dr. Norman E. Rosenthal and his colleagues first put a name to the disorder in 1984. Today, it’s characterized as a seasonal pattern of major depressive episodes, according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. SAD ranges widely in severity, from the doldrums Dr. Rosenthal calls the “winter blues” to disabling ennui. Its cyclical nature differentiates SAD from major depressive disorder.
“We have a tendency to want to blame everything on psychological causes,” Dr. Rosenthal explained. “We overlook the obvious, which is that it’s dark as pea soup outside. That’s why I think [SAD] goes unrecognized — it’s right in front of our noses.”
While SAD should be diagnosed and treated by a licensed medical professional, several treatment options have emerged in the decades since it was first recognized. Here are a few ways for patients and their doctors to address the disorder, ranging from most to least widely used.
Light therapy provides an affordable and effective treatment
In 1980, Dr. Alfred Lewy published his discovery that certain levels of artificial light suppress humans’ nighttime production of melatonin — a hormone that helps regulate sleep cycles. Waking in the dark can have a jet lag-like effect on people with SAD. For that reason, bright light therapy remains the first line of defense. More than 60 studies have also clinically demonstrated that light therapy alleviates symptoms.
Wirecutter, a New York Times company, tested a multitude of light boxes to find the best ones available. A writer, Kit Dillon, found the Carex Day-Light Classic Plus lamp to be effective, safe, and cheaper than several others. It also comes recommended by the Center for Environmental Therapeutics, a nonprofit collective of scientists and clinicians who research environmental therapies. Before you run out and get one, keep in mind that because SAD is a medical condition, even light boxes should be used under the care of a professional.
“I don’t have SAD, but I did manage to shift my circadian rhythm a bit just from waking up early and taking in small doses of the light before dawn,” Mr. Dillon said. “I’d compare it to something like a strong cup of coffee without the crash.”
Cognitive-behavioral therapy teaches you coping skills 
One of the challenges facing SAD patients and the physicians who treat them is its annual recurrence. A SAD expert and the director of clinical training at the University of Vermont, Dr. Kelly Rohan, found that a form of cognitive behavioral therapy tailored to SAD patients works not only when SAD strikes, but can actually help break the cycle.
“Cognitive behavioral therapy is a form of talk therapy that seeks to change thought patterns and behavior,” Dr. Rohan said. She explained that C.B.T. and light therapy “could not be more different.”
“In one, you’re sitting in front of a box to jump-start your circadian rhythms,” she explained. “In C.B.T., a person’s thoughts and behaviors provide an entry point.” In other words, C.B.T. is active and light therapy is palliative. Dr. Rohan’s study found that over time, the behavioral skills C.B.T. instills reduced the recurrence of SAD in a greater proportion of patients than those who used light therapy alone.
Dr. Michael Young, past president of the Society for Research and Psychopathology and the Society for Light Treatment and Biological Rhythms, said it makes sense that changing one’s behaviors would affect SAD symptoms. While he called Dr. Rohan’s findings “a little disappointing for those of us in the light field,” he also touted the long-term benefits of C.B.T.
“On the psychological side, part of [C.B.T.] teaches people skills to help themselves,” he said. “Once people learn those, they don’t tend to forget them. It doesn’t require putting aside half an hour [to sit in front of a light lamp] or continuous meds, which only work if you take them.” He also emphasized the importance of finding a C.B.T.-trained practitioner who has experience treating SAD specifically, since more focused treatment is more effective, over all.
Exercise and small behavioral changes can keep depression at bay
All of the experts agreed that, especially when combined with either light therapy or C.B.T., small behavioral changes can make a big difference. Dr. Young recommended heading outside and getting some exercise, especially in the morning.
“People’s behaviors can affect biology and psychology,” he said. “For all sorts of depression, [sufferers] decrease activity, decrease social interactions and decrease activities that give us pleasure because we think we won’t enjoy things. It’s a biological phenomenon: Physical activity is good for our mood.” Even on cloudy days, he noted, the amount of sunlight outside still has a better effect than artificial light indoors.
So-called natural antidepressants like getting out of the house and staying active can have a great effect on SAD symptoms, Dr. Rohan noted. “I don’t necessarily push people to do winter activities, but find your own way to engage [with the season],” she advised. “We’re trying to change the hands and trying to change the head, but the hands can change the head.”
Dr. Young also advised setting specific times for mood-boosting activities. “If you don’t put it on the schedule, you’ll get to the end of the day and somehow it didn’t happen. Have a plan,” he suggested. “Life gets in the way, even if you’re highly motivated.”
While he has not tested it extensively yet, Dr. Rosenthal has also found success with meditation. He uses Transcendental Meditation, but said other forms may have a similar effect. “You want to be able to internally enjoy every day,” he explained. “It’s not a matter of beating the winter, but a matter of embracing it.”
Antidepressant medication can help when nothing else does 
Sometimes even light therapy, C.B.T., and behavioral changes don’t quite cut it. Dr. Rohan noted that the Food and Drug Administration approves certain antidepressant medications for the treatment of SAD.
Some studies have shown selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (S.S.R.I.s), sertraline (also known as Zoloft) and fluoxetine (also known under the brand name Prozac) in particular have improved SAD symptoms. Another study discovered that patients who started bupropion XL (also known under its brand name, Wellbutrin) before the onset of symptoms actually saw a lower recurrence. In those trials, early antidepressant treatment reduced the overall risk of SAD by about 44 percent.
As with any other disorder, what works for one SAD patient might not work as well for another. “The most important thing is, there are options,” Dr. Rohan said. “There’s no need to suffer in silence.”
Lizz Schumer is a freelance journalist and author of “Buffalo Steel.” Follow her on Twitter @eschumer.
