Few Clues in Chinese Editor’s Detention
Even amid a hardening crackdown on civil society and rights activists in China, many journalists and writers were caught off guard when Xu Xiao, a mild-mannered culture and books editor at Caixin Media magazine, was taken away last week by the Beijing police on suspicion of “endangering national security.” 
Days later, it remains unclear what precisely brought misfortune on the diminutive 60-year-old. No one has been allowed to see Ms. Xu since she was taken into custody on Nov. 26. But she isn’t the only one: that day Liu Jianshu, 28, an N.G.O worker and movie enthusiast, disappeared too, his wife, Zhao Sile, said on Wednesday.
There were threads in common — both were said to be involved in setting up rural libraries for the poor, the Liren Rural Library project, and had ties to loose groups of citizens interested in political development.
But the news of the detentions of Ms. Xu, Mr. Liu and others in recent days has unsettled Chinese intellectuals and activists, illustrating a creeping fear: Anyone, it seems, is vulnerable — you don’t have to be a firebrand to get into trouble, they say. Being networked and in the wrong place at the wrong time may be enough. Or perhaps just “being” may be enough these days, they say, in a treacherous political landscape.
“Don’t ask again why ‘disappearance’ fell on Xu Xiao’s head,” Zeng Jinyan, a Hong Kong-based rights advocate and Ph.D. student wrote on her blog. She listed a dozen other recent disappearances, detentions or arrests of people in the literary, legal or N.G.O. worlds, including the social activists Kou Yanding and Guo Yushan.
“It’s because they were talented and were willing to endure a threadbare existence, each of them in their special positions, to make enormous efforts to help China progress,” Ms. Zeng wrote. 
On Dec. 1, Ms. Zhao received a mailed notice from the police that Mr. Liu had been detained for “illegal business operations,” she said. Mr. Liu’s status is unclear as his wife says she has not been able to meet him yet nor discuss his case with the police, but she was permitted to deliver clothes and money to the Beijing No. 1 Detention Center, where he is being held.
Ms. Xu’s detention was discovered a day after it took place, when a friend, Liu Suli, the founder of an independent bookstore, called on her at her home in the north of Beijing. No one came to the door and her phone was turned off, Mr. Liu wrote on his Sina Weibo blog a couple of days later. Alarmed, family and friends began searching for the missing woman, to learn that Ms. Xu was, like Mr. Liu, in the Beijing No. 1 Detention Center.
According to Ms. Zeng, Ms. Xu was born in the 1950s in Shanghai and grew up in Beijing. In love with poetry and literature, she befriended people who shared those passions. The edgy, underground works of poets such as Bei Dao, whom she would soon get to know and later work with, caught her imagination.
It wasn’t uncommon for a young and thinking person like Ms. Xu to feel lost during the chaos of the Cultural Revolution, which ran from 1966 to 1976. Searching for answers, she became committed to the idea of change and progress in China, friends said.
As she later wrote in an essay, “From then on, the moment I started to care about other people’s fates and tragedies, I myself inevitably entered the tragedies, becoming part of them.” 
On a cold January night in 1975, aged just 20, she was unexpectedly handcuffed and blindfolded by an unknown, middle-aged man, and imprisoned for two years along with a dozen other people, for “participating in a counterrevolutionary clique,” a charge that later was judged groundless. 
After her release, she enrolled at Beijing Normal University to study Chinese literature and soon became involved in Today magazine, an independent literary publication, first as a volunteer and then on staff. 
The magazine survived just two years before it was shut down by the government in 1980, but the impact of this experience on Ms. Xu and her peers was profound. She nurtured friendships and ties with many writers and intellectuals. It was at Today that she met her future husband, Zhou Meiying, who died in 1994 after spending three years in a hospital, leaving her to raise their son, 6 years old at the time, alone. 
She worked as an editor at the state-owned Guangming Daily Publishing House for a decade, before joining Caijing magazine, and then Caixin Media.
In “Half a Life” (半生为人), a collection of essays published in 2005, Ms. Xu wrote about the friends who shared the experiences and spirit of the 1970s and 1980s. 
Many were affiliated with Today magazine, such as the poets Bei Dao and Mang Ke, two of its founders. She also wrote about her two years in prison in a darkly comic fashion, vividly rendering the hardships but also the absurdities. The book was reissued in 2012.
A couple of months ago, reports spread that propaganda officials had ordered books by Yu Ying-shih, a professor emeritus of East Asian studies and history at Princeton University, and Giddens Ko, a Taiwan writer and film director who uses the pen name Jiu Badao, removed from store shelves. Others were prohibited from publishing new titles, the reports said. Ms. Xu was one. 
Ms. Xu said at the time that she had no idea why she would be on this list, as she had no plans to publish any book of her own, though she had helped publish a book by another author on the list. 
To those around her, the situation seemed threatening. A friend suggested she take a vacation, as far away as possible, ideally abroad. Ms. Xu dismissed the suggestion, saying she was fine.
In late October, as the weather in Beijing grew cold and heavy pollution draped the city, she met with friends and colleagues at the home of one of them. The talk was of the broadening censorship push and fresh detentions. Everyone expressed concern. Just weeks later, she herself was gone.
