Should the President Be Able to Block You on Twitter? - Room for Debate
The Opinion Pages


Danielle Keats Citron, a professor of law at the University of Maryland, is the author of "Hate Crimes in Cyberspace." 

Elizabeth E. Joh is a professor at the University of California, Davis, School of Law. She is on Twitter (@elizabeth_joh).
Everyone Should Be Able to Follow His Account

How should the leader of the free world tweet? President-elect Trump likes to use Twitter, and his love of 140-character-based messages won’t likely change once he enters the White House. This election, more than any other, highlighted the power of social media to influence public opinion. Trump took to Twitter to, among other things, denounce the media, criticize individuals and spread his campaign messages to his more than 15 million followers as @realDonaldTrump. President Obama indicated before the election that the official @POTUS Twitter account he now uses, with more than 11 million followers, would be available to the next president.
In a modern democratic society keeping the social media account of a president open to all ought to be a matter of custom.
Should a president’s Twitter account be permitted to block anyone, including journalists? Blocking is a Twitter feature designed to help its users address well-documented harassment and abuse. If a user blocks you, you can’t see that person’s tweets, nor can you “retweet” them in order to comment on them. While blocking is a tool to fight harassment, a user can block a follower for any reason. (Blocking does not make it impossible to view a person’s tweets, although it is much more difficult to do so.)
Trump has displayed at times an open hostility to the traditional media, with The New York Times as a favorite target. The president-elect has also shown signs that he intends to depart from presidential conventions regarding the news media, such as always traveling with the White House press pool. Blocking individual reporters would be one more restriction on press access to the president. 
Surprisingly, the question doesn’t have an easy legal answer, but the best policy answer is no. As a private company, Twitter is not itself considered a public forum regulated by the First Amendment. Twitter sets the rules for its users and might, for example, create special rules for the President or other public figures. As for Trump, when he assumes office in 2017, his speech is probably government speech. The First Amendment permits the government to control its own speech, so blocking followers may be permissible. The right choice for Trump, however, both now and when he assumes office, would be to refrain from blocking people — and to unblock those now unable to see his account.
Like granting the White House press pool access, the president’s social media obligations may ultimately be decided as a matter of custom. In a democratic society that values transparency and accountability, keeping the social media account of a president open to all ought to be part of these customs. Twitter and other social media platforms are part of the new normal, a shared reality that demands new best practices about press freedom and good governance.
Like Everyone Else, He Should Be Able to Talk to Whom He Wants

The president of the United States is free to decide whom to listen to, whether online or offline. If the president tunes out advice from strangers or intimates, then that is his choice. Blocking followers on Twitter is not a matter of government censorship, but rather of expressive freedom to listen and speak. The president can decide if he wants to hear out the public in person, on the phone or online. The choice to block is no different from a decision to decline an invitation to a conference. It may be inadvisable but ultimately it is his decision. 
Blocking followers on Twitter is not a matter of government censorship, but rather of expressive freedom to listen and speak.
No one else’s rights are infringed if the president blocks followers on social media. A presidential Twitter account is not hosting official business like an agency rulemaking where the public has the right to comment on policy. It is not carrying out constitutional, statutory or other ceremonial presidential duties. 
While the president can block and mute to his heart’s desire, the key question is whether he should. Do the ethical implications of blocking change when a social media fan moves into the White House? It is one thing to block followers because they are engaging in destructive behavior. No one should have to tolerate harassment, stalking or threats. As the report issued by the Anti-Defamation League’s Task Force on the Online Harassment of Journalists found, blocking tools are indispensable to ensuring the safety of individuals targeted for online abuse. 
But it would be a different story if the president blocked followers to insulate himself from criticism and inconvenient truths. What if the president eschews mainstream avenues for press access in favor of social media outlets? What if journalists who challenge the administration’s policies are excluded from online conversations while supportive journalists are rewarded with affirming tweets? The risk would be the loss of access to the president and information essential to the public. The president would find himself insulated from the people he is tasked with serving. To forestall this state of affairs, the press might shade their coverage to protect their ability to interact with the president online. Having a heavy hand on block and mute features would be costly to democratic values of transparency and public participation. 
President-elect Donald J. Trump on Twitter. Josh Haner/The New York Times
Since the election, President-elect Donald J. Trump has said more to the American people on Twitter than anywhere else. While the man who will soon to be our Tweeter in Chief has harshly attacked critics and others in tweets, his wife, Melania, has said she would devote herself to promoting online civility. One way of avoiding offensive people on Twitter is to block them from following you. Should a president be able to do that?
This is part of the Issues for Trump and America series.
