How do you sex a fossil? | Elsa Panciroli
Penis bones: bacula from various mammals. From collection by Ray Bandar. Photograph: KPA/Zuma/REX/Shutterstock

“It was a slit, like this,” Vinther held his cupped hands side by side and opened and closed them, like a puppet’s mouth. “That’s it. That’s what a dinosaur cloaca looked like.”
For those who don’t habituate the often explicit world of natural scientists, let me explain. A cloaca is the opening through which most vertebrate animals excrete their waste and have sex. It is an all-purpose exit and entry-point. Jakob Vinther from the University of Bristol, and his colleagues, are currently describing the only known dinosaur cloaca. It belongs to a spectacular Psittacosaurus specimen that preserves details of skin texture and even colouration. Their upcoming research will be the first ever scientific description of actual dino-privates.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two Dunnocks ( Prunella modularis ), cloaca pecking before mating. Photograph: Arend Vermazeren/Wikimedia/ Arend Vermazeren

How did dinosaurs do it? I asked Vinther. The mimes he then performed as we sat in the pub are perhaps best left undescribed. But this got me thinking about sex in the fossil record in general. How did extinct animals mate? With no DNA in the fossil record to shed any light on the topic, what can we see in the anatomy of extinct animals to hint at their sex? In other words: how can we tell a girl-dinosaur from a boy-dinosaur? 
As everyone knows, sex was invented in Scotland. Research published recently on placoderm fish fossils from Scottish Devonian lakes (around 365 myo) found evidence for how this extinct group of animals copulated. In today’s cartilaginous fish, there are tell-tale claspers behind the pelvic fins. These are used to transfer sperm from the male to female during mating. Some of the earliest fossil fish species have been found with these structures (or lacking them, if they are female) suggesting this form of fish-sex has an ancient origin. These Scottish fossils are among the first evidence for sex among vertebrates.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Artist’s impression of the armoured fossil fish, Microbrachius dicki, mating. Based on fossil evidence from Scotland. Illustration: Dr Brian Choo/Flinders Universit/PA

Anatomically speaking, the obvious differences between the sexes are often in the genitals. For invertebrates, the fossil record of sexual organs is varied. Among insects, genital structures aren’t just indicators of sex, but often used as diagnostic features to name new species. But because insects have no bones, they rarely preserve in deep time. 
Among squishy squid, octopuses, and other cephalopods, males have a specialised arm (not tentacle) called the hectocotylus, used in mating. Males can either give spermatophores to the female in a sexy game of pass-the-parcel, or some species just rip their own arm off and hand it over. The hectocotylus, like many other genitals, is made of soft tissues which are unlikely to be fossilised. The rarity of soft-tissues in the fossil record is what makes Vinther’s dinosaur cloaca is so unusual. 
When it comes to dinosaurs, it turns out having a skeleton doesn’t necessarily make things easier. Take Dippy, the London Natural History Museum’s (NHM) famous sauropod dinosaur skeleton cast, currently on tour across the UK. I asked Prof Paul Barrett from the NHM if Dippy was a Ms, or a Mr? “We’ve no idea what sex Dippy was sadly. Indeed it’s almost impossible to sex a dinosaur skeleton.” Things are muddled even further by fossil casts, as these copies are often composites, with elements of the skeleton being taken from different specimens that may be different sexes. 
 But sexing your dinosaur can be done. Barrett continued: “there are only two sure fire ways to do so at the moment, both of which can tell you if it’s female. One of these is to find eggs preserved in the right part of the skeleton - which is known but incredibly rare. The other is to identify a special type of bone tissue within the long bones, called medullary bone.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Dippy’ the dinosaur, one of the Natural History Museum London’s best-loved inhabitants. The 26 meter plaster replica skeleton of a Diplodocus, a dinosaur that lived in North America 150 million years ago, could have been male or female. Photograph: Matt Dunham/AP

Medullary bone serves as a calcium reservoir on the inside surface of bones, and is produced in female birds when they are preparing to lay eggs. Medullary bone is also seen in the fossil record of both avian (bird) and non-avian dinosaurs. Some dinosaur fossils are argued to be breeding females thanks to the presence of medullary bone - most famously in a specimen of T. rex. While this may help pick out a few egg-laying female dinosaurs, it doesn’t identify non-breeding females, or males.
“It’s a major unsolved problem, which might be impossible to crack unless some imaginative geochemical clue comes to light,” Barrett concludes.
A spectacular example of known female fossil, is a pterosaur specimen of Darwinopterus, affectionately nicknamed Mrs T. Pterosaurs are not dinosaurs, but an entirely separate group of flying reptiles that evolved and lived in the Mesozoic alongside them. One Middle Jurassic skeleton from China has a fossil egg nestled between its thighs, probably expelled from the body during decomposition. Researchers noted the animal’s broad pelvis and lack of a head crest – in contrast to other specimens of the same species. They concluded that this was a female, and that head crests in this pterosaur – and possibly many others – were larger in males. 
Sexual selection for display structures like head crests and other ornamentation is well-known in living animals – the peacock’s tail and antlers of deer are two obvious examples. When enough fossils are known of both sexes, such display structures are a give-away that a fossil animal was male. But the pterosaur crest-case is far from settled. Some researchers argue that head crests may have been present in both sexes, but increased in size with age. Mrs T may have been Miss T, whose crest simply hadn’t developed yet.
Finding a fossilised animal with eggs or young inside them is an obvious giveaway, but the same can’t be said for nests, or care-giving. There are a variety of care-giving strategies among animals today, including sole female parenting, sole male parenting (such as emperor penguins and seahorses), both parents care-giving, or extended family caregiving (like lions, or meerkats), not to mention harems, colonies, and abandonment to fend for themselves. We simply don’t know the childcare arrangements of extinct animals. Size provides little help either: which sex is the biggest varies wildly between different animal groups in the modern world. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The penis bones, or bacula, from a honey badger (above) and meerkat (below), from CT scans. Illustration: Charlotte Brassey

When it comes to mammals though, there is another way to sex your fossil. It may come as a surprise to discover that many male mammals on the earth today possess a penis bone. Called a baculum, it is found in Carnivora, rodents, Eulipotyphla (like hedgehogs and shrews), bats, and all primates except humans, woolly monkeys and spider monkeys. Bacula can be straight rods, s-shaped curves, or even bizarre, flared scoops. Although the baculum has been extensively examined by researchers over the years, there are still many unanswered questions. 
“My project is part of a growing body of research to focus on the evolution and biomechanics of mammal genitalia”, explained Dr Charlotte Brassey from Manchester Metropolitan University. I met Brassey after her fascinating lecture at a palaeontological conference last year. Her research aims to “understand the function of the baculum in the context of the whole soft tissue structure of the penis, and particularly in the relation to the corresponding female genital anatomy.”
Brassey admitted that people have mixed reactions to her work due to the explicit nature of the subject matter. This “squeamishness” has held back our understanding of the evolution of genital structures. While it seems obvious that a penis bone might make copulation easier, what I wanted to know was why all male mammals don’t therefore have one?
“That’s the million dollar question”, admits Brassey. She believes understanding the function and evolution of the penis bone may provide an answer. “Typically mammals that copulate for extended periods of time also tend have well-developed bacula. In mammals that are polygamous such as pinnipeds [seals], the males typically have longer and more rod-like bacula. Functionally, it seems likely that the baculum plays a role in protecting the urethra from getting bent or twisted during prolonged sex, and hence make sure that sperm can be delivered.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elephant seals are among the mammals in the modern world that have penis bones. Its shape is probably connected to their mating practices. Photograph: Roie Galitz / CWPA / Barcroft

Identifying a male mammal in the fossil record is therefore easier when it sports a penis bone, but finding one is a rare occurrence. One of the oldest known mammal bacula is from a Carnivoran called Amphicyon, from around 15 mya. A handful of penis bones are known from younger fossils such as cave bears, but this bone is often lost after death. “The penis bone does not directly attach to the pelvis, so when the animal begins to decay, the baculum quickly becomes separated from the rest of the body.” Some bacula are partly composed of cartilage, the same material that forms the human earlobe, which also doesn’t fossilise easily, “so just because a fossil mammal is missing a baculum” says Brassey, “it does not mean we can assume the animal was a female.”
It turns out that male mammals are not the only ones with a bone - “just to make matters more confusing, female mammals can also have a small bone located in their clitoris called the baubellum. In some species such as the squirrel, the baubellum is almost the same size as the baculum. In others, the baubellum is extremely reduced in size compared to the male structure.” Even in the most familiar, living mammals, the skeletal distinction between the sexes is far from clear cut.
Vinther’s dinosaur may be one of the few extinct creatures for which sex is certain. While it may seem like an unimportant detail, lifting a dinosaur’s skirt (or kilt) can provide information on the social and evolutionary dynamics of these long-dead animals. Rare glimpses in the fossil record suggest sex was as complicated and varied in the past as it is in the animal kingdom today. One thing is certain: I’ll never look at squirrels the same way again.
References
 Long JA, Mark-Kurik E, Johanson Z, Lee MSY, Young GC, Min Z, Ahlberg PE, Newman M, Jones R, den Blaauwen J, Choo B, and Trinajstic K. 2015. Copulation in antiarch placoderms and the origin of gnathostome internal fertilization. Nature, 517, 196-199 
Lü J, Unwin DM, Deeming DC, Jin X, Liu Y, and Ji Q. 2011. An egg-adult association, gender, and reproduction in pterosaurs. Science 331: 321-324.
 Schweitzer MH, Zheng W, Zanno L, Werning S, and Sugiyama T. 2016. Chemistry supports the identification of gender-specific reproductive tissue in Tyrannosaurus rex. Scientific Reports 6: 2309. 
 Topics
