From skiing to tombstoning – how dangerous are our favourite pastimes?
A skier in Japan has been killed by falling rocks – but it’s not the only hazardous activity in which many of us are inclined to indulge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For leisure skiers, the risks are manifold. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo

One skier has been killed and others have been injured in Japan by volcanic rocks falling from Mount Kusatsu-Shirane. This seems a horribly improbable risk – although skiing is notoriously dangerous and expertise provides no guarantee of safety. In November, French skier David Poisson (a world championship medal winner) died in a training accident. This week, a 19-year-old woman died in a skiing accident in Minnesota, the latest of several fatalities at US resorts this year. For leisure skiers, the risks are manifold. Too much snow can raise avalanche warnings; too little creates a risk of impact injuries. There are also alcohol-related skiing injuries and ski-lift-related skiing injuries. But how hazardous is skiing compared with other purportedly dangerous recreations?
Skiing
According to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, there were 58 British deaths and 118 hospitalisations arising from skiing and snowboarding in European resorts between 2012 and 2016. To put this in context, the UK travel trade association Abta estimates that 1.8 million Brits will go on a ski holiday this year. The US National Ski Areas Association reports that, during the 2016-17 season, there were 54.8m skier and snowboarder visits to US ski areas, 44 of which ended in fatal injury.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tombstoning is generations old, although the name is recent. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo

Tombstoning
The name is enough to put off the risk-averse. This pursuit – which entails dropping vertically from height into the sea – is generations old, but became notorious owing to a spate of deaths and catastrophic accidents. The UK coastguard recorded 139 injuries and 20 deaths between 2004 and 2013.
Potholing
A niche of caving, potholers descend deep holes (some practitioners use the terms “caving” and “potholing” interchangeably). Caving is one of the only forms of original exploration left, according to the British Caving Association (which prefers the term “caving” to “potholing”). There’s “barely a fatality a year”, according to their spokesperson, Andy Eavis.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A caver explores the main chamber of Gaping Gill in the Yorkshire Dales. Photograph: Robbie Shore/Getty Images/Aurora Creative

Football
According to the FA, in England, one in five adults participates in football in some form. At elite level, injuries cost Premier League clubs £79m during the first half of the 2016/17 season. A study of the women’s Bundesliga found an injury rate of 3.3 per 1,000 hours. The rate doubled after the 60th minute of a match.
Tide podding
There has been, to put it technically, a “large spike in single-load laundry packet exposures among teenagers”, according to the director of the American Association of Poison Control Centers. More than 40 calls relating to children aged 13 to 19 partaking in the “Tide Pod challenge” – eating detergent capsules – have been recorded in the US this year.
 Topics
