Paul Hartnack obituary
Paul Hartnack was posted to the British embassy in Paris, where he negotiated traffic rights for British airlines

My husband, Paul Hartnack, who has died aged 74, was for 10 years Comptroller General and chief executive of the Patent Office. His success was remarkable as he had no scientific training and completed his A-levels only after joining the Board of Trade in his teens in 1961.
Paul was born in Livingstone, Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia), to an English mother, Maud (nee Godden Griffiths), and a Danish father, Carl, a civil servant. His childhood was turbulent as his parents fought constantly. When they finally separated, Maud returned to Britain with Paul and his younger brother, Michael, settling in Hastings, where the boys went to the local grammar school.
While Paul was still studying for his A-levels his struggling mother packed him off with £1 and the name of a contact in a London hostel to start work as a clerical officer at the Board of Trade. He lived in the hostel, working at London Zoo at the weekends to earn more money, and studied alone for his A-levels.
However, he managed to rise through the ranks of the civil service. He worked on the Committee of Inquiry into Civil Aviation, which led to the Edwards report of 1969. He then went to the British embassy in Paris, negotiating traffic rights for British airlines.
After two years as assistant secretary to the National Enterprise Board, in 1981 he became secretary of the newly formed British Technology Group. His next posting, in 1985, on promotion to assistant secretary in the DTI’s finance division, saw him at his most determined and creative as he pushed the DTI towards the fundamental realignment of the civil service into executive agencies following the Robin Ibbs “Next Steps” report of 1988.
This led directly to his appointment to the Patent Office as it became one of the early “Next Step” agencies. Among his successes was the reversal of the downward trend of UK patent applications and the elimination of the backlog of trademark applications, which helped to secure the viability of the UK Patent Office.
He retired early in 1999 because of heart trouble.
Paul and I married in 1966. He is survived by me and by our two sons, Christopher and Michael, and three grandchildren.
 Topics
