Don't knock the flu jab – it’s a modern miracle | Jenny Rohn
Varying rates of flu vaccine effectiveness are to be expected, but shouldn’t stop you getting it Photograph: Cultura RM Exclusive/Colin Hawkins/Getty Images/Cultura Exclusive

“The flu jab DOESN’T work, officials admit,” scolded a recent headline from the Daily Mail.
Meanwhile, in the comments under that article, and in shadier regions of the internet, conspiracy theorists are having their usual annual field day: the flu vaccine actually makes people sick; the World Health Organisation is in cahoots with Big Pharma; the vaccine is being deliberately sabotaged by its manufacturers to drum up business for more expensive anti-viral therapies.
Most sensible people understand that our impressive arsenal of vaccines is a modern miracle that prevents vast numbers of premature deaths. Together with improvements in nutrition, sanitation and modern medicine, routine inoculations have lifted us out of the dark ages.
The problem with influenza is that, unlike some other bugs, it’s a tricky shape-shifter. Because of this, the vaccine against it is not nearly as effective as others. For example, a complete course of MMR vaccine is 97% effective at preventing measles; two successive doses of the chicken pox vaccine are about 98% effective; and tetanus toxoid is about 100% effective. What’s more, these impressive figures stay relatively constant year on year. 
In contrast, the success of the annual flu vaccine ebbs and flows dramatically, and the healthcare profession is pretty happy when it reaches a modest 40-60% efficacy. Some years it is much worse – as in 2004-05, when its effectiveness was only 10%.
It’s probably no surprise that people think the flu jab is rubbish – especially when the media is delighted to rub failures into the noses of those who work so hard to make it happen. We have become so accustomed to highly effective vaccines that it can be tempting to criticise those that don’t work perfectly. With such high prevention rates, many vaccinated people will feel disappointed when they succumb to the illness. Just as a man who pulled himself out of starvation to become rich might one day frown upon anything but a grand feast, the developed world – from its privileged, 21st century vantage – is happy to talk down a cheap and serviceable preventive measure that improves global morbidity and mortality and reaps significant economic benefit.
And the discontent is rife. In 2014-15, the US Centers for Disease Control issued an early press release warning that some circulating strains had drifted and the vaccine might not be as effective. Traditional media outlets tutted, and antivax interest groups went into meltdown, jeering at the august public health body for this admission, as if anything less than perfection was a humiliation.
In fact, predicting the three or four flu strains that will be included in each year’s vaccination is an astonishing feat of science and surveillance by countless individuals and reference laboratories around the world, on a par with forecasting the precise weather that will occur hour by hour in a month’s time. Every year as the needle slides into my own arm, I give a moment of quiet thanks to these hard-working folk. 
Influenza viruses spread from person to person like lightning and also move through various animal reservoirs. In the process, they discard one coat for another, mixing and matching pieces of their genomes with other viruses in an endless game of cat and mouse with the immune systems of the various species they inhabit. Add overpopulated areas and global travel into the picture and what you have is a stochastic, messy and imprecise brew of many thousands of strains, from which only three or four must be plucked.
Once you choose you can’t go back. Because influenza will only grow – painfully slowly – in chicken eggs, it takes half a year to create and stockpile each year’s vaccine. When surveillance picks up crucial shifts after the February deadline, as it did in 2004, it’s far too late to do anything about it.
And let’s unpick the phrase “it didn’t work”. Even the 10% effectiveness rate in 2004-05 wasn’t a complete washout. In the US, as a result of being vaccinated tens of thousands of elderly people did not end up in hospital, and a number of people did not die. 
For the price of a cinema ticket, you had a one in ten chance of dodging the disease had you been exposed to. There are lots of gamblers who would be happy to spin the wheel for those odds. I certainly am, having had the flu before and being painfully aware of how long it can wipe you out. Those one in ten who were protected helped to quell infection in others via herd immunity, and the vaccinated people who did get sick likely received some benefit from cross-reacting immunity elicited against the other strains in the vaccine.
There’s been a lot of hype about “Aussie flu” this year, but the offending strain (A H3N2) was around last year and is represented in this year’s vaccine. If the flu season turns out to be as bad in the northern hemisphere as it was in the southern, it won’t be the fault of the vaccine. Instead, we should remember that despite all its imperfections, it’s a remarkable achievement that doesn’t deserve the bad press it perennially suffers. What’s more, one hundred years on from the Spanish flu, which killed 50 million or more people in 1918, it’s comforting to know that we, as a species, have this annual chance to hone our skills of prediction and prevention for when the next pandemic comes.
 Topics
