Re-entry program helps inmate fight anger issues
CLOSE

 Harold Sylvester entered Lafayette prison a drug dealer struggling with addiction and the anger he felt over the brutal death of his father at the hands of men he once mentored. The prison re-entry program helps him. NOLA's First 72+ helps others. Jarrad Henderson, USA TODAY
After two decades of cycling in and out of prison, Sylvester is dealing with his past and trying to leave violence behind.

CONNECTTWEET 22 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
The seventh in a series of multimedia projects that examine causes for recidivism in the American justice system.
LAFAYETTE, La. — Three times, Harold Sylvester almost died.
He had been hooked on Spice, a synthetic form of marijuana. And during one of those three overdoses, Sylvester, now 42, heard paramedics say there was nothing else they could do to save him.
The inmate gets emotional as he sits in a room filled with bunk beds and blue lockers at the Lafayette Parish Correctional Center and recalls his early life. He talks about the crimes he has committed and the toughest moment of all — the murder of his father. 
He remembers a young man he mentored who killed his dad during a dispute. When Sylvester went to prison on drug charges, he was placed in a cell near the killer. The man taunted Sylvester, writing him letters about the murder. Sylvester came up with a plan to kill him.
When the inmate was outside of his cell one day, Sylvester saw his chance. On his way to the prison nurse's station, Sylvester made his move, but at the last minute turned away, unable to bring himself to take the inmate's life.
Sylvester remembers being angry and fighting frequently while in prison. And while he wasn't a killer, he also never developed the skill set to deal with his anger until he reached Lafayette — which has one of the nation's few comprehensive prison programs that help men deal with anger issues. 
Chapter 8 preview: One inmate explains how he was trained for prison:
Overall, men are victims of — and act on — violence while incarcerated at levels that far exceed that of women. And it's generally violent crimes that get men incarcerated (and re-incarcerated) at much higher rates than women.
Rates of sexual violence, for example, are higher in male prison facilities. And nearly 90% of offenders arrested for robbery are men; 77% of those arrested for assault are men, according to 2012 FBI crime statistics. 
When it comes to our criminal justice system, gender is more of a determinant of who gets locked up than race, according to Paul Butler, a Georgetown University law professor and the author of Chokehold: Policing Black Men.
The need to "be hard" or push to earn respect is something that also shapes black male experiences in America. The relationship between the way society judges masculinity (for black and white men) and criminal justice reform is a complex one.
For Sylvester, anger and violence started long before he entered the system. 
Hardened by life
Sylvester was a high school athlete who had dreams of a career in sports medicine or social work.
But he dropped out of school and joined a drug ring out of a desire, he says in retrospect, to belong. His father, he says, wasn't around much. 
He soon learned that drug life wasn’t glamorous. He saw someone get shot in the head at point blank range. 
The lifestyle hardened him.
He became known as the violent go-to guy. When people "wanted something done," Sylvester says, he was the person everyone in his circle turned to.
Sylvester admits he did hideous things to a lot of people. The first time he was arrested was in 1996 for aggravated assault. He did half of an eight-year sentence and fought every day in prison. 
“I was so empty,” he says.
He was incarcerated three more times, mostly on drug-related charges. He sold meth, Xanax, Spice and Valium to anyone from mothers to 12-year-old kids. 
Six months before his latest incarceration, Sylvester had been trying to get his life together. He had stopped using, he says, and gotten a job as a casino chef. But drugs were everywhere, and temptation overpowered him. 
He was arrested in May 2015 for distribution. He was sentenced two years later, just three months before our August visit. 
In May 2017, Sylvester was staring at four years at Richwood Correctional Center. 
He wrote to Lafayette Correctional Center and asked for admission to its re-entry program.
By this time, he had five daughters. He needed to do better, he says, for them. 
More to come on The First 72+. Hear Derrick Perique's story:
Comprehensive reform? 
Louisiana incarcerates more people per capita than any other state.
In June, the governor signed a comprehensive criminal justice reform package in hopes of decreasing the number of people in the state’s prisons and jails. The legislation includes the elimination of mandatory minimum prison terms, a reduction in sentencing for non-violent crimes (including drugs), and an increase in programs aimed at reducing recidivism. 
The new legislation would help someone like Sylvester, who has been incarcerated four times, mainly for drug offenses, and who grapples with drug addiction and trauma.
About 80% of people who are in prison are either addicts or mentally ill.
Prisons, Butler says, are the largest mental-health institutions in the country, and most fail at providing services. Only about a third of prisoners who need mental health services are getting them. Prisoners with serious mental illness are twice as likely to be arrested within one year of release. 
A Brooklyn-based program has at least one answer for keeping men out of prison and lowering recidivism rates among violent offenders. 
Common Justice, run by Danielle Sered, focuses on non-punitive forms of restitution decided by the victim. The program lasts for 15 months. It takes in mostly men who have committed robberies or assaults and would be sentenced to a year or more in prison. It has served about 80 offenders since 2009, and has a recidivism rate of less than 7%. 
The group also pushes for racial equity in the justice system, and contends that punishment for violent crime among men is disproportionately applied by race. Butler's explanation: The misguided societal perception that black men are threats brings harsher punishment for them than for white men. 
Incarceration is seen as a treatment for the problems of black men in America, Butler says. Issues that perpetuate crime — poverty, lack of education, lack of job opportunities — are met with repeated incarceration instead of social solutions.
Developing skills to start over
On a warm, rainy August day, Sylvester looks down at the prison's concrete floor as he talks about how Lafayette's re-entry program is helping him. He understands his anger issues and is learning how to deal with trauma. 
In a different prison building, re-entry participants sit in a classroom completing grammar worksheets. On the first floor, men compete to see who can make the most shots inside a muggy, glass-enclosed basketball court.
The prison's 100-hour pre-release program includes 10 modules that cover life skills such as anger management, mental health counseling, employment training, victim restitution and substance abuse treatment. The program usually lasts from 90 to 100 days. When they first arrive, offenders get an assessment that tells officers the courses they may need. The goal is to give those who are incarcerated resources that would help them be successful on the outside. 
“Our philosophy," says Maj. Cathy Fontenot, warden of the Lafayette Correctional Center, "is that re-entry starts at the time of sentencing."
Fontenot worked at Louisiana’s Angola prison, which also has an in-house re-entry program that was co-founded in 2010 by Orleans District Judge Arthur Hunter Jr. He says judges should do more than just sit on the bench and issue rulings. They should be more involved in their communities and in reducing and preventing crime.
“If you want more bang for your taxpayers’ dollar, what is better? To give them the resources so that they can become better and productive people or just let them go somewhere and sit for three to 15, 20 years and come out worse than what they were?” Hunter asks. 
In Angola’s re-entry program, inmates serving life sentences act as mentors for others re-entering society. Lifers skilled in certain trades, teach. Other men act as “social mentors.” They talk to participants about having the right attitude to keep a job and give them a reality check about where they will end up if they keep committing crimes. Once a participant completes the program, which is a minimum of two years, he is released on five to 10 years’ probation. 
About 150 inmates have completed it, and the recidivism rate for those men is 15%, much lower than the national average.
Hunter was motivated to start the program after seeing too many promising lives cut short in his courtroom. The case of Roderick Anderson stuck with him.
The 19-year-old was good-natured and had a supportive family. He dropped out of high school and stood before Hunter the first time on a marijuana charge.
After that, he was arrested for burglary.
Hunter ran into Anderson one night outside of the courtroom and gave him what he hoped would be an uplifting lecture on getting off of drugs and getting his life together. 
But in 2009, Anderson was shot to death. His body was found on a street corner. 
If there had been a re-entry program in Louisiana when Anderson walked into his courtroom, Hunter says, he would have put the young man in it.
It could have done for Anderson what Lafayette's program is doing for Sylvester. 
After two decades of cycling in and out of prison, Sylvester is dealing with his past and trying to leave violence behind. 
He acknowledges that he has had too many close encounters with death. He wants to one day speak to youth, maybe even someone like Anderson, about drugs and hopefully stop them from making the same mistakes he has made. 
Lottie Joiner is a 2017 John Jay/Harry Frank Guggenheim Crime Reporting Fellow and a Fund for Investigative Journalism/Schuster Institute Social Justice Investigative Reporting Fellow.
Eileen Rivers is the Web content editor for USA TODAY's Editorial Page and editor of Policing the USA's Re-entry Project. Follow her @msdc14. 
Visit Policing the USA or the Re-entry project for more podcasts, videos and interviews with male, female and juvenile inmates across America in coming installments of this series. 
CONNECTTWEET 22 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2nqXE22
