Winners in 3 states to split record $1.6B Powerball jackpot
The Powerball lightning bolt finally struck. Lucky ticket holders in three states — California, Florida and Tennessee — will split the record $1.6 billion Powerball jackpot that lured millions of lottery hopefuls into a frenzied buying spree.
The winners beat the 1-in-292.2 million odds by picking the magic combination: 4, 8, 19, 27, 34 and Powerball 10.
The winners can opt for annual payments over decades or an immediate lump sum.

No one has stepped forward yet to claim a share, but everyone now knows where the winning tickets were sold: A 7-Eleven in Chino Hills, Calif.; Naifeh's Food Mart in Munford, Tenn.; and a Publix grocery in Melbourne Beach, Fla.
Even though the big prize winners haven't stepped forward publicly, lottery officials were already cutting checks for the retailers that sold the jackpot-winning ticket.
Naifeh's Food Mart in Munford, a city of about 6,000 people located 30 miles north of Memphis, was set to get a $25,000 check Thursday afternoon. The store is owned by the brother and nephew of former Tennessee House Speaker Jimmy Naifeh.
CLOSE

 Naifeh's Food Mart in Munford, Tenn., sold one of three winning Powerball tickets, state lottery officials announced Thursday during a celebratory news conference at the small-town store just north of Memphis. Shelley Mays / The Tennessean
When word spread that a winning ticket was sold at a 7-Eleven in Chino Hills, hundreds of people who won't get a dime basked in the glory anyway, many taking selfies with the store clerk on duty because, well, why not?

“I’m very proud that the ticket was sold here,” the clerk, M. Faroqui, told local newspaper the San Bernardino Sun. “I’m very happy. This is very exciting.”
Store owner Balbir Atwal, noting his lotto machine, called it the “luckiest place in all the planet.”
“I’m very excited and happy,” he told the Sun. “My community has helped me so much, I’m so grateful to them. I don’t know how much I’m getting but I’ll be helping my employees and my family and community.”
Florida's jackpot winning #POWERBALL ticket was purchased at Publix on Highway A1A in Melbourne Beach! Still no word on who the winner is...
— Florida Lottery (@floridalottery) January 14, 2016
Many locals stood around to cheer and mug for TV cameras that descended on the suburban community of 77,000 residents located about 35 miles east of Los Angeles.
“It’s history. We’re all so excited for our city,” said Rita Talwar, 52, who has lived in Chino Hills for 30 years.

In Florida, the winning ticket was sold at a Publix grocery in Melbourne Beach. An employee told Florida Today the store has been inundated with phone calls.
John Koontz, a front service worker at the store, had just stepped out of his car to show up for work when someone he knew asked him the big question: Was it true?
“They’re all excited. One of the locals just asked me was it true that the winning ticket was sold here,” Koontz said, lining up one of the store scooters in the cart area. “Can you imagine this is happening here at our little store?”
Dave Demi didn't win the Powerball but said he's happy about the possibility someone from Melbourne Beach may have.
"I'd say good for you," Demi said, braving the early morning chill to walk into the Driftwood Plaza Publix to check his ticket for other possible winnings. "I bought two tickets here and two at a convenience store. I did the one Powerball number," he said chuckling.
Others were also excited. One worker was overheard saying to another, "it happened here."
We have a winner in California! A jackpot-winning ticket was sold in Chino Hills. We’re still awaiting results from other states.
— California Lottery (@calottery) January 14, 2016
In addition to the winning ticket, the California Lottery said 12 tickets matching five of the six Powerball numbers were sold for Wednesday's drawing. Those winners will get a $1 million prize.
Contributing: J.D. Gallop, Florida Today; Natalie Neysa Alund and Jason Gonzales, The Tennessean
Correction: An earlier version of the Powerball by-the-numbers graphic had incorrect information for the $1 million and $2 million winners. They are 73 and 8, respectively.

x
Embed
 Tennessee Grocery Store Sells Powerball Winner 

 Powerball: How much did you win? 

 Florida Town Celebrates Powerball Win 

 Video l The Night We Won the Lottery 

 Calif. 7-Eleven Sells Powerball Winning Ticket 

 3 winning tickets sold in record Powerball jackpot 

 Sports odds more likely than winning Powerball 

 Powerball frenzy 

 State-Line Powerball Ticket Sales Exploding 

 Stephen Colbert has some really bad advice for winning the Powerball 

 Would you wait in this 3 hour line for powerball tickets? 

 Your four best friends after winning the lottery 

 First things you should do if you win Powerball jackpot 

 Two holes in one more likely than lotto win 

 5 things more likely to happen than winning the powerball 

 What you need to know about the record Powerball 

 Even Hollywood celebrities eager to play the Powerball 

 What to do with your piles of cash after winning The Powerball 

 $900M Powerball Jackpot: What you can and can't buy 

 Powerball jackpot balloons to $1.3 billion 

 Official: Powerball Pot Could Hit World Record 

 Hundreds Line Up at Calif. Border for Powerball 

 What you can and can't buy with the Powerball jackpot 

 6 things to know about the Powerball jackpot 

 A short list of things you should invest in besides Powerball 
CONNECTTWEET 16 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1RmNcjU
