Expedia's year in review: The top destinations, hotels and activities
Many destinations in 2017 were affected by natural disasters or terrorist attacks.
But according to Expedia.com’s review of data from Jan. 1 to Nov. 15, U.S. residents were still willing to travel to places such as Las Vegas, which suffered a mass shooting. They also ventured abroad. 
Cancun, New York, and Las Vegas topped the list for bookings among travelers in 2017.
Spain, especially Madrid and Barcelona, was among the most searched destinations in the world. 
“Looking at this year’s top air travel destinations, one thing that stood out to me was that so many of these places were affected by adverse events, like hurricanes and travel advisories,” says John Morrey, vice president and general manager of Expedia.com. “But despite that, the data shows travelers are still interested in and visiting these destinations.”
The most booked domestic destinations were: Chicago, Las Vegas, Orlando, Los Angeles, and New York.
The most booked international destinations were: Guadalajara, Paris, Mexico City, London, and Cancun. 
The most searched domestic destinations were: Orlando, New York, Miami, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas.
The most searched international destinations were: Bangkok, Barcelona, Madrid, and Cancun.

As for hotels, 2017 was the year of the short getaway with the average stay peaking at two nights.
The most in-demand boutique hotel was The Belvedere Hotel in New York.
The most in-demand all-inclusive hotel was the Riu Santa Fe All Inclusive, Cabo San Lucas.
The most in-demand hotel overall was the Circus Circus Hotel, Casino & Theme Park, Las Vegas.
Vacation rentals continued to increase in popularity but were most popular in Australia. Four of the five destinations where vacation rentals were most in demand were in Australia. Orlando was the only U.S. destination to break into the top five.
The top cities for car rentals, from least to most popular were:
Atlanta
Las Vegas
Denver
Orlando
Los Angeles
Expedia pulled data from its Things to Do section. The top activity category was Tours & Sightseeing. Most of the top five activities involved theme parks. They were:
Knott’s Berry Farm admission
Skip-the-Line: Vatican Museums Tour
Ripley’s Aquarium of Myrtle Beach
Walt Disney World Resort Tickets
Disneyland Resort Tickets
Las Vegas, New York and Paris were the top cities for attractions, tours and experiences.
For a look at the most popular destinations and hotels, click on the photo gallery above.
