Chip Kelly has the hottest seat in the NFL right now
7.6k shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
Corrections/clarifications: A previous version of this story included an incorrect nickname for the St. Louis NFL team.
The quality of the coaches who, after two weeks, appear to be in danger of not staying employed after this NFL season is nothing short of astonishing.
New York Giants coach Tom Coughlin has won two Super Bowls. The New Orleans Saints’ Sean Payton has won one. Jeff Fisher of the St. Louis Rams is in his 21st year as a head coach.
Yet the most interesting of the group is Chip Kelly. Largely because that’s what Chip Kelly has proven to be: Interesting.
Effective? Not yet. Not consistently.
So now the Eagles must consider how much longer to let the experiment run.
Several teams reportedly wanted to hire Kelly, but the Eagles succeeded in making the bet that his innovative and fast-paced offensive scheme at Oregon could translate in the NFL.
After two games of Kelly’s third season — following an off-season during which he took control of personnel decisions and repeatedly made bold (and bewildering) moves — it appears they were wrong.
The Eagles gained 226 yards in a 20-10 loss to the Cowboys Sunday, a chunk of which came late in the game when the Cowboys were sitting back in deep zones to stop long passes. (The game was so putrid in general it proved one outrageous thing: The Redskins can compete.)

(Eric Hartline, USA TODAY Sports)
DeMarco Murray, who Kelly signed after sending fan favorite LeSean McCoy to Buffalo in a trade (the player he got in return, linebacker Kiko Alonso, was coming off an ACL tear; he left Sunday’s game with a knee injury), gained 2 yards on 13 carries.
Murray has now run 21 times this year for 11 yards. He did have five catches for 53 yards Sunday, but so far he’s not been nearly as dynamic as McCoy.
Kelly failed to notice that Murray’s success last year had mostly to do with running behind a great offensive line for a team able to stretch the field thanks to a top-flight wide receiver (that player, Dez Bryant, missed Sunday’s game with injury; the Eagles let their best and fastest receiver, Jeremy Maclin, leave in free agency.)

(Eric Hartline-USA TODAY Sports)
Sam Bradford, brought in by Kelly to replace Nick Foles, was 23-for-37 passing with two interceptions. He failed to make throws despite usually have time to do so and looked generally bewildered. The interception he threw to end one Eagles’ drive — on the heels of Tony Romo’s injury — was the definition of a forced throw. There was no opening. On a later somewhat promising drive, he simply missed a wide open receiver.
Kelly’s rebuilt offensive line was feeble when run blocking. Evan Mathis — another player unceremoniously dispatched before the season — certainly would have helped.

(Eric Hartline, USA TODAY Sports)
Philadelphia’s refreshed secondary struggled and allowed Brandon Weeden — who didn’t even bother to warm up after Romo was hurt — to complete 7-of-7 passes. Brandon Boykin, who dared to want more playing time (as if that’s unique for a reserve, or in any way a negative thing), was off playing for the Pittsburgh Steelers.
The Eagles’ defense actually was pretty good. But there’s not a defensive unit in the league that will succeed if it is on the field 40 minutes, allowed to rest only during 3-and-outs run at 2-minute-drill pace in the first half.
Though the Eagles have lost five of their last six games under Kelly, his career record is 20-14 and you could easily argue he deserves more time to bring this team together. It did, afterall, undergo all of those drastic changes. And, unlike college football, you don’t have to be nearly perfect during the season to even have a chance to play for the national title. There’s time for the Eagles to turn it around.
But Kelly does not seem to have adjusted to the fact that he’s coaching wealthy, free-thinking pro athletes who are facing pro athletes of the same caliber.
At Oregon he could be a dictator and get away with it. NCAA football players have basically no rights; they could try to leave, and Kelly could block them from transferring. He had complete power over them.
He also had a huge budget, thanks to Nike founder Phil Knight, and could recruit players who were usually better than the opponents’ players. With 85 of them on scholarship and dozens of other playing as walk ons, he could run his intense system through intense practices and always have enough healthy and talented players to make it through.

(Bill Streicher-USA TODAY Sports)
That hasn’t worked in the NFL. As much as he wants it to, Kelly’s system doesn’t erase talent deficiencies, and he keeps making his team worse by getting rid of guys who dare to question him or hold a different thought. His offensive scheme, it has turned out, is a fairly typical set of plays that, when run quickly against a flagging defense, sort of works. When offensive players who are as likely as the defense to tire — because there are fewer substitution options with a smaller squad — rush through those plays, the scheme looks sloppy and unsophisticated.
Or sort of like a lot of next-big-thing offenses brought to the NFL by college coaches.
Kelly’s aloof genius routine played well in a college town. Philadelphia fans even bought it for a while, owing partly to his early success but more so to their deep desire to get to a Super Bowl. Underneath all of that vitriol is a lot of sunny happy faith that the Eagles will find their way.
Doing so under a guy who refuses to explain himself and believes he always knows best works just fine for Eagles fans.
Unless, of course, he proves incapable of adjusting to the rest of the league adjusting to him. Which is why they booed him off the field Sunday.
They know you don’t win a Super Bowl by having the best plan (or team) during the preseason. You win a Super Bowl by reworking the plan repeatedly, so that even when it is old it seems news. That’s what makes you a genius at the NFL level.
If Kelly can’t re-ignite his offense in the next four (seemingly winnable) games — at the Jets and Redskins, home against the Saints and Giants — those fans will also know this: it is time to move on.
