California man sues, says Uber was his idea
Corrections & Clarifications: Updates to clarify the outcome of Halpern's 2009 lawsuit.
SAN FRANCISCO—A yogi and filmmaker who has previously sued two other technology firms on Thursday filed suit against Uber, claiming its founders and investors stole the idea and design of the service from him.
Kevin Halpern's suit was filed in San Francisco Superior Court.
In it, he says Uber CEO Travis Kalanick stole the idea for a real-time, cellular phone-based car service from his startup, Celluride Wireless, which Halpern founded in 2003.
According to the suit, Halpern discussed his ideas with Kalanick and Uber co-founder Garrett Camp beginning in 2006. Two years later Kalanick and Camp presented the ideas at a venture capital conference and Uber launched several months later.
All of Halpern's agreements with the founders of Uber were "oral agreements" and there were no written non-disclosure agreements or other paperwork, his lawyer, Christopher Dolan said.
Instead Halpern has what Dolan termed "a poor man's copyright" -- a sealed envelop he mailed himself in 2005 which included information about his idea. That envelope is still sealed and now resides in his safe, Dolan said.

x
Embed
VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Teen repairs search and rescue robot for police | 1:30
A Texas police department sought the help of a Dallas County teenager after they struggled to get their search and rescue robot up and running. VPC
1 of 66

x
CLOSE

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Amazon, Google & Facebook are wired to keep growing market share | 4:53
Both Facebook and Google are great brands with platforms that are virtually impossible for a competitor to replicate, said Aziz Hamzaogullari, portfolio manager for the Loomis Sayles Growth Fund. Hamzaogullari added that the anti-trust suit against Newslook
2 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Just Cool Cars: 1972 Reliant Regal 330 | 1:36
USA TODAY's Chris Woodyard talks to Dale Davis of Costa Mesa, Calif., about his three-wheeled '72 Reliant Regal 330. Video by Dan MacMedan and Leslie Smith
3 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Health care technology booms | 0:59
Unity Stoakes, co-founder of StartUp Health, talks about the revolution of health care through technology. Trisha Thadani, Collin Brennan
4 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Students attend WWDC courtesy of Apple | 0:52
Some 350 students get to attend Apple developer conference on a scholarship to pick up tips and tricks on how to make apps. Jefferson Graham reports Sean Fujiwara
5 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Amazon launches free shipping on small items | 0:40
Amazon on Tuesday introduced free shipping for small and light products that are under 8 ounces and cost less than $10. USA TODAY
6 of 66

x
CLOSE

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH SoundHound voice app could be smarter than Siri or Cortana | 1:37
SoundHound's new Hound app is a lot like Apple's Siri or Microsoft's Cortana ... except it appears to be a bit smarter. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
7 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Telemedicine provides access to medical services | 3:30
Dr. Andrew Barbash, a neurologist with telemedicine company Specialists On Call, discusses the benefits of his role from his home office in Rockville, Md. USA TODAY
8 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Nintendo quashes rumors of future deal with android | 2:00
Rumors of a Nintendo Android deal which showed up on a respected Japanese business paper were dismissed by the big N on Tuesday. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
9 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH GoPro announced a new camera with Touchscreen, Stock skyrockets | 1:01
GoPro (GPRO) shares jumped as much as 7% on Monday after the company announced a new camera. The GoPro Hero+ LCD is a touchscreen camera that's only its second offering that features a built-in screen, according to CNET. Newslook
10 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Meet young developers making Apple apps | 2:08
Meet Isabella and Sofia Mandich, two 8th graders spotlighted in Apple's new "20 Under 20" promotion of app developers under 20 years old who have developed apps for the Apple iTunes App store. Sean Fujiwara, USA TODAY
11 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Shazam makes the move from audio to visual | 2:33
Shazam CEO Rich Riley and Google X Founder Sebastian Thrun discuss how Shazam will move from audio to visual. Bloomberg
12 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Google and Udacity team up to offer Android 101 | 1:27
Udacity founder and CEO Sebastian Thrun discusses Android nanodegrees and partnering with Google. Bloomberg
13 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Apple is late to VR And AR | 1:35
Certain Apple acquisitions could be clues the company is eyeing the augmented reality and virtual reality markets. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
14 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Microsoft's 'Cortana' faces off against 'Siri' | 2:03
'Cortana' is Microsoft's answer to 'Siri' and the two are facing off in what many call the "voice wars." VPC
15 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Best smart home gadgets | 3:02
Tech columnist Marc Saltzman picks the best devices for making your home smarter. USA TODAY
16 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Hyperloop is Getting a Test Track in California | 0:52
The "Hyperloop," a hypothetical high-speed transportation system that could shuttle people between Los Angeles and San Francisco in only 30 minutes, just sped a bit closer to reality. First proposed in 2013 by billionaire entrepreneur Elon Musk, CE Wochit
17 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Review: Google Photos app needs taming | 1:46
Jefferson Graham reviews the new Google Photos app, which offers unlimited storage for all your photos. So now for the challenge: how to find them? USA TODAY
18 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Google unveils Android's latest technological tr | 2:24
Android's next version to offer new ways to fetch information, pay merchants, protect privacy. (May 28) AP
19 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Preview Google's new Photos app | 1:34
Google just launched its all-new Photos app which offers free, unlimited photo and video storage along with a few unique features for organization and sharing. Jefferson Graham previews. Sean Fujiwara
20 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Google shows off its Android Wear watches | 0:45
One difference between Apple Watch and Android Wear: You don't have to move your wrist to tell the time. Marco Della Cava reports. Chris Wiggins for USA TODAY
21 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Fitbit vs. Jawbone: The Wearable Wars Heat Up | 4:50
Cadigan Talent Ventures’ Steve Cadigan and Bloomberg's Katie Benner discuss the battle between Jawbone and FitBit. Bloomberg
22 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Google Cardboard set to Jump to new level | 3:57
USA TODAY's Marco Della Cava checks out the for-the-masses virtual reality platform will soon be provided with a growing library of spherical video content. (TECH, USA TODAY)
23 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Google’s New York City ‘Geek Street Fair’ | 1:57
Google New York hosted its second annual Geek Street Fair, showcasing interactive and innovative activities and experiments geared towards students of all ages. Michael Monday, USA TODAY
24 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Android 101: How Udacity Can Help Make Better Apps | 1:49
Udacity co-founder Sebastian Thrun discusses the company's partnership with Google that gives Android developers a curriculum to help tackle the growing demands of the mobile operating system. Bloomberg
25 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Netflix is apparently hogging North America's bandwidth | 1:21
A new study says Netflix accounts for about 37 percent of North American Internet traffic during peak hours. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
26 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Text prank causes iPhone's to crash | 1:00
Plain and simple text this sequence to your friends and it will cause their phone to shut down...if you feel the need to be that annoying. Patrick Jones (@Patrick_E_Jones) explains. Buzz60
27 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Virtual reality is coming to YouTube | 0:44
The buzz at Google I/O was the next development of its Cardboard VR viewing device and Google's partnership with GoPro, whose camera sets will record VR-ready videos. Chris Wiggins for USA TODAY
28 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH How will customers benefit from Android pay? | 5:25
Juan Benitez, chief technology officer at Braintree, and Bloomberg's Cory Johnson discuss Google's upgrades to Android announced today at Google I/O. Bloomberg
29 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Google connects cars with Android Auto | 1:43
USA TODAY's Marco Della Cava reports from Google's I/O event. USA TODAY
30 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Pebble Time vs. Apple Watch | 2:09
Pebble Technology CEO Eric Migicovsky compares the app experience for Pebble Time users to that of Apple Watch users. Bloomberg
31 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Apple watch intrudes on struggling luxury brands | 1:36
Although Apple execs say the Apple Watch wasn't intended to be a midrange luxury product, recent sales numbers for other brands suggest otherwise. Video provided by Newsy Newsy
32 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH GoPro reveals plans for drones, virtual reality | 0:53
Shares of GoPro (GPRO) rose in Thursday trading after reports that the video camera-maker is getting into the drones business. The Street
33 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Avago Technologies to acquire rival Broadcom | 1:03
Chipmaker Avago Technologies (AVGO) said it agreed to acquire rival Broadcom (BRCM) for $37 billion in cash and stock. The deal values the combined company at $77 billion. Newslook
34 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH GM to offer Apple, Android systems in '16 models | 1:21
General Motors will be offering Android and Apple systems in many of its 2016 cars. Other automakers are expected to follow suit. (May 27) AP
35 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Apple reclaims title of world's most valuable brand | 1:09
After a year in second place, Apple bumps Google out of the way to nab first place in brand value. Noting the success of the iPhone and Apple Watch, the Apple brand is nearly $250 billion. Brett Larson breaks down the numbers. Buzz60
36 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Bugged text messes with iPhones | 1:05
IPhones are reportedly shutting down when sent a specific text message from any device. Time
37 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Tech to help with hurricane season | 1:05
Hurricane season 2015 is here and there is a handful of useful apps and gadgets to help. Brett Larson rounds up the latest must-haves before the weather gets bad. Buzz60
38 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Code Conference draws tech heavyweights, and aspiring ones | 2:03
Executives of some of the biggest names in tech and business meet in Palos Verdes, CA to speak at Code Conference while startups clamor for attention. USA TODAY, Sean Fujiwara
39 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH 'Robot doctor' performs anesthesia at WA hospital | 1:52
A Seattle-area hospital is among the first in the country to use a computer that serves as an anesthesiologist. VPC
40 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH IRS says thieves stole tax info from 100,000 | 1:40
IRS says thieves used online agency service to get access to 100,000 tax returns. (May 26) AP
41 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Periscope arrives on Android | 0:36
No more wondering when Periscope for Android is coming. The Twitter-owned live streaming app released an Android version on Tuesday, exactly two months after it launched on iOS. USA Today
42 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH How your security questions could get you hacked | 1:27
A recent study from Google found that most security questions used to protect our accounts from hackers are actually not very secure. Video provided by Newsy Newsy
43 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Best photography apps for smartphones | 1:07
The cameras on our smartphones are getting better with every update, but there is always room for improvement. TC Newman (@PurpleTCNewman) has great apps for photography! Buzz60
44 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Punchlines: The latest gadgets that aren't taking off | 1:30
The late-night comics take a look at the latest technology news. Watch our favorite jokes, then vote for yours at opinion.usatoday.com. Eileen Rivers
45 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Charter Communications makes deal for Time Warner Cable | 0:53
Just weeks after Comcast's failed attempt to acquire Time Warner Cable, Charter confirms it's purchasing the second-largest cable and internet provider instead. The $79 billion deal boils down to $55.33 billion excluding debt. Wochit
46 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH It's a 'Rhinestone Cowboy' sing-along! | 0:41
Join Tim, Dolly, Darius and more in paying tribute to the Glen Campbell hit Time
47 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Android Auto comes to Hyundai Sonata | 2:07
USA TODAY’s Chris Woodyard demonstrates the new Android Auto system in the Hyundai Sonata. Android Auto brings the functions of the mobile phone into the automobile. Video produced by Robert Hanashiro, USA TODAY 
48 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH New research may help prevent Alzheimer's | 2:08
An ambitious study is testing if an experimental drug might help healthy but at-risk people stave off Alzheimer's. In addition to brain scans checking for amyloid build up, researchers are looking for tangles of a protein named tau. (May 26) AP
49 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH 4 things to know about electronic health records | 3:03
AthenaHealth CEO Jonathan Bush talks about electronic health records. 
50 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Take an inside look at life-changing brain surgery | 3:32
A Colorado man undergoes deep brain stimulation to help him deal with his Parkinson's disease. VPC
51 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Skin Cancer: 5 myths debunked | 1:40
May is melanoma awareness month. A dermatologist breaks down five popular skin cancer myths. VPC
52 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Instagram's new retention tool sounds A Lot like Spam | 1:11
Instagram hopes its "Highlights" emails will show dormant users what they're missing on the photo-sharing site. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
53 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Google's high-Tech Teddy won't Tuck you in at night | 1:42
Google has a patent for a teddy bear that can "aim its gaze" at you. But some are calling it "creepy," and the toy might never make it to market. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
54 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Watch out for these spam emails | 3:40
Columnist Jennifer Jolly helps you identify spam emails and offers tips on how to stop them. 
55 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Turn iPad into mini production studio with iOgrapher | 1:00
In part 3 of his Mobile Video series, Jefferson Graham previews a souped up iPad that turns the tablet into a full-blown production camera, via the iOgrapher. 
56 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Did Oculus founder pull a Zuckerberg for his Kickstarter? | 1:18
Oculus VR founder Palmer Luckey is under legal fire for allegedly using technology developed for another company to build his Oculus Rift VR headset. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
57 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Surf Report: What's the toughest smartphone? | 3:41
Tech columnist Marc Saltzman puts 3 'rugged' smartphones through a battery of tests. 
58 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Must have road apps for the summer season | 1:10
From cheap gas to interesting roadside attractions, don't get caught with your apps down this summer! Brett Larson has a few must-haves as we head into the unofficial start of Summer. Buzz60
59 of 66

x
CLOSE

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Google patents 'creepy' toys that watch, listen to your kids | 0:54
Worried about Google snooping on your Web browsing or email? That may be the least of the Internet giant's intrusions if their patent for sensor-packed dolls and toys ever gets put to use in your kids' room. 
60 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Exclusive: Jim Lee debuts Batman figure for Comic-Con | 1:23
Jim Lee, artist and co-publisher at DC Comics, reveals in an exclusive video his BlueLine Edition Batman action figure, which will be available for fans at San Diego Comic-Con in July. DC Entertainment
61 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH What's coming to Netflix in June? | 0:37
Summer is starting, but thanks to Netflix you may want to spend the beginning of the season holed up inside and glued to your couch. But also, the streaming service is hooking audiences up with an awesome new slate of movies and TV shows. Wochit
62 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Need sunscreen? Yes, there's an App for that | 1:56
EWG has released an app - SkinDeep - that lets consumers scan the bar code of a sunscreen and see if it appears on their "green list" - meaning it is effective. Medill News Service for USA TODAY
63 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Will Shopify go the way of Etsy? | Americas Markets | 1:36
America’s Markets with David Craig. Shopify is riding high up 51% after its IPO. But at the same time Etsy is reeling, now down 42% after a massive gain following their own IPO. Michael Monday
64 of 66

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Military suit with suspended armor, computer makes debut | 1:19
The so-called military 'suit of the future' makes its debut in Tampa. The suit contains built-in night vision, computers and communication systems as well as a metal skeleton. VPC
65 of 66

x
CLOSE

VIDEO: THE DAY IN TECH Scrabble adds lolz, ridic, shizzle and lotsa other new words | 0:48
Scrabble dictionary has added lotsa new words for its players, and some are so ridic, they'll make you lolz. The venerable board game has an additional 6,500 words, including a few once limited to social media and technology. USA TODAY
66 of 66
 Teen repairs search and rescue robot for police 

 Amazon, Google & Facebook are wired to keep growing market share 

 Just Cool Cars: 1972 Reliant Regal 330 

 Health care technology booms 

 Students attend WWDC courtesy of Apple 

 Amazon launches free shipping on small items 

 SoundHound voice app could be smarter than Siri or Cortana 

 Telemedicine provides access to medical services 

 Nintendo quashes rumors of future deal with android 

 GoPro announced a new camera with Touchscreen, Stock skyrockets 

 Meet young developers making Apple apps 

 Shazam makes the move from audio to visual 

 Google and Udacity team up to offer Android 101 

 Apple is late to VR And AR 

 Microsoft's 'Cortana' faces off against 'Siri' 

 Best smart home gadgets 

 Hyperloop is Getting a Test Track in California 

 Review: Google Photos app needs taming 

 Google unveils Android's latest technological tr 

 Preview Google's new Photos app 

 Google shows off its Android Wear watches 

 Fitbit vs. Jawbone: The Wearable Wars Heat Up 

 Google Cardboard set to Jump to new level 

 Google’s New York City ‘Geek Street Fair’ 

 Android 101: How Udacity Can Help Make Better Apps 

 Netflix is apparently hogging North America's bandwidth 

 Text prank causes iPhone's to crash 

 Virtual reality is coming to YouTube 

 How will customers benefit from Android pay? 

 Google connects cars with Android Auto 

 Pebble Time vs. Apple Watch 

 Apple watch intrudes on struggling luxury brands 

 GoPro reveals plans for drones, virtual reality 

 Avago Technologies to acquire rival Broadcom 

 GM to offer Apple, Android systems in '16 models 

 Apple reclaims title of world's most valuable brand 

 Bugged text messes with iPhones 

 Tech to help with hurricane season 

 Code Conference draws tech heavyweights, and aspiring ones 

 'Robot doctor' performs anesthesia at WA hospital 

 IRS says thieves stole tax info from 100,000 

 Periscope arrives on Android 

 How your security questions could get you hacked 

 Best photography apps for smartphones 

 Punchlines: The latest gadgets that aren't taking off 

 Charter Communications makes deal for Time Warner Cable 

 It's a 'Rhinestone Cowboy' sing-along! 

 Android Auto comes to Hyundai Sonata 

 New research may help prevent Alzheimer's 

 4 things to know about electronic health records 

 Take an inside look at life-changing brain surgery 

 Skin Cancer: 5 myths debunked 

 Instagram's new retention tool sounds A Lot like Spam 

 Google's high-Tech Teddy won't Tuck you in at night 

 Watch out for these spam emails 

 Turn iPad into mini production studio with iOgrapher 

 Did Oculus founder pull a Zuckerberg for his Kickstarter? 

 Surf Report: What's the toughest smartphone? 

 Must have road apps for the summer season 

 Google patents 'creepy' toys that watch, listen to your kids 

 Exclusive: Jim Lee debuts Batman figure for Comic-Con 

 What's coming to Netflix in June? 

 Need sunscreen? Yes, there's an App for that 

 Will Shopify go the way of Etsy? | Americas Markets 

 Military suit with suspended armor, computer makes debut 

 Scrabble adds lolz, ridic, shizzle and lotsa other new words 
The suit says Halpern is entitled to "a significant share of Uber's value." In addition to Kalanick and Camp, venture capitalists Bill Gurley and Bill Trenchard, and investor Scott Belsky are also named in the suit.
The popular ride-hailing company has raised $5.9 billion in investment. By some reports it has entered into a new funding round that would send its valuation to $50 billion.
"These claims are completely baseless. We will vigorously defend against them," Uber spokeswoman Kristin Carvel said in a statement.
Dolan held a news conference on Thursday to announce the suit. Halpern did not attend, but instead posted a video on YouTube about his case, entitled "Grand Theft Uber."
The full news conference is also available on YouTube.
Halpern has a history of filing lawsuits. One was against entrepreneurs Anu Shukla, and Mitch Liu, who helped found a startup called OfferPal Media. Halpern's 2009 suit claimed they had an agreement to create a product together that Shukla and Liu reneged on.
Liu settled for $250,000 in 2012. The suit against Shukla was dismissed in 2013, Halpern's attorney said.
He also sued the city of Santa Cruz, Calif. for unlawful arrest after he was arrested for being under the influence of an illegal stimulant, the San Francisco  reported. That suit also was dismissed.
Kalanick's attorney, Dolan, is a prominent San Francisco consumer lawyer who has represented several other plaintiffs in various suits against Uber.
They include the family of six-year-old Sofia Lu, who police say was killed by an Uber driver on New Year's Eve in 2013. Dolan said he took the case because he considers Uber among the class of "bad corporate actors."
On his Facebook page, Halpern described himself as an "Entrepreneur, Ride Sharing Pioneer, Environmental Filmmaker, Aspiring Yogi, Organic Lover, Chinese & Ayurvedic Medicine Devotee, Essential Oil Disciple."
CONNECTTWEET 30 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1bU1qWs
