Euroseas Ltd. Scales Back Amid Falling Dry Bulk Freight Rates
Shipping company Euroseas Ltd.  ESEA 2.11%  is scaling back capacity and resetting its finances amid bleak world-wide demand for hard commodities and collapsing dry bulk freight rates.
The Athens-based company, which is currently operating a fleet of 11 dry cargo, dry bulk and container ships globally, said Tuesday that it had sold two ocean vessels, delayed the delivery of three new ships and is refinancing six ships in its fleet to increase liquidity.
“With the dry bulk market at 30-plus-year lows and containership markets also very close to the lowest levels, we believe we have managed to position the company to take advantage of any cyclical market recovery over the next couple of years,” Chief Executive Aristides Pittas said in a statement.
The two ships Euroseas is selling—a small container vessel built in 1990 and a 12-year-old dry bulk carrier—will go to third parties for recycling. Euroseas said the cash would help pay for three new dry bulk ships to be delivered later this year after deliveries were pushed back for several months. The company said it concluded financing on a fourth new dry bulk ship that now won’t be delivered until early 2018.
top logistics news
Get the latest logistics and supply chain news and analysis via an email newsletter. Sign up here.
It could take that long, or longer, before the dry bulk sector emerges from the current storm. In a recent report, Drewry Shipping Consultants Ltd. said companies in the dry bulk shipping industry aren't expected to become profitable again until at least 2017, as freight rates remain weak. The Baltic Dry Index, a closely watched measure of shipping rates for a batch of industrial commodities, fell this week to the lowest point in its 30-year history.
Publicly-traded carriers have been punished in equity markets. Shares of Greece’s Star Bulk Carriers Corp. , Paragon Shipping Inc. and DryShips Inc., all fell more than 80% last year and now are penny stocks.
Euroseas, which peaked at more than $50 a share about five years ago, has watched its share price fall in the past year almost 70% from a 2015 high of $8.40 a share last April. Shares were flat at $2.57 on Tuesday.
Dry-bulk shipper Global Maritime Investments Cyprus Ltd. filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in September, saying that too many ships were chasing too little business, and resulting volatility in charter rates left Global Maritime with more debt than it could handle.\
 Write to Erica E. Phillips at erica.phillips@wsj.com
