And The Best Whole Wheat Sandwich Bread Is...
The supermarket shelves are overrun with bread options. There are more brands baking loaves of sandwich bread than we can keep straight, and each individual brand makes an array of different types of loaves. Options are good, but sometimes it’s just too much. It makes finding a good whole wheat sandwich bread feel like a search for a needle in a haystack.
The folks at Cook’s Illustrated have got our backs. Not only did they break down what to look for to ensure you actually get a whole wheat sandwich bread ― you’re going to want to make sure you look for 100 percent whole wheat, which is a regulated term ― but they also searched for the best.
Cook’s Illustrated tested seven brands of 100 percent whole wheat bread. They tried them made into ham and cheese sandwiches, as buttered toast, and just plain. What they found was that a couple of brands stood clearly above the rest, but none of them were remotely as good as the winner.
We have the winner here for you today. Without further ado, ladies and gentlemen, the best supermarket whole wheat sandwich bread is ...
Arnold’s 100 Percent Whole Wheat

Arnold

Arnold's beat out all other national 100 percent whole wheat breads, such as Nature's Own and Pepperidge Farm. Not even Martin's potato bread version held a candle. The tasters found that Arnold's had the best texture ― dense and moist ― as well as a strong whole grain taste without any off flavors, and had a pleasant, subtle sweetness. Head on over to Cook's Illustrated to see the tasting notes.
There’s only one last test this bread has to undergo: how does it stand up as avocado toast? If you decide to test it out, try it with one of these recipes below:

 
 How Sweet It Is 
 Get the Mexican Grilled Corn Avocado Toast recipe from How Sweet It Is
 
 

 
 With Food + Love 
 Get the Avocado Toast with Cilantro Lime Cashew Cream recipe from With Food + Love
 
 

 
 James Ransom/Food52 
 Get the Salted Avocado Toast recipe from Marian Bull via Food52
 
 

 
 Half Baked Harvest 
 Get the Avocado Grilled Cheese with Tomato Pesto recipe from Half Baked Harvest
 
 

 
 Faring Well 
 Get the Dukkah And Avocado Toast recipe from Faring Well
 
 

 
 How Sweet It Is 
 Get the Autumn Avocado Toast recipe from How Sweet It Is
 
 

 
 Two Peas And Their Pod 
 Get the Garlic Bread Avocado Toast recipe from Two Peas And Their Pod
 
 

 
 The Nutritional Epiphany 
 Get the Chimichurri Avocado Toasts recipe from The Nutritional Epiphany
 
 

 
 How Sweet It Is 
 Get the Goat Cheese Avocado Toast recipe from How Sweet It Is
 
 

 
 Healthy. Happy. Life. 
 Get the Lemon Avocado Toast and Nutty Basil Pesto recipe from Healthy. Happy. Life.
 
 

 
 James Ransom/Food52 
 Get the "Moroccan Guacamole" Toasts recipe with Fried Egg recipe from creamtea via Food52
 
 

 
 What's Gaby Cooking 
 Get the Avocado Toast with Smoked Salmon recipe from What's Gaby Cooking
 
 

 
 The Bitten Word 
 Get the Avocado Toast with Chile Flakes and Crushed Pistachios recipe from The Bitten Word
 
 

 
 James Ransom/Food52 
 Get the Avocado, Feta, and Mint on Sourdough Toast recipe from Food in Durham
 
 

 
 What's Gaby Cooking 
 Get the Avocado Toast with Pico de Gallo recipe from What's Gaby Cooking
 
 
Do you have a favorite whole wheat sandwich bread? Let us know in the comments below!
