Virgo Horoscopes: Daily, Love & Monthly Forecast
Weekly Love Horoscope
 There might be some ups and downs this week in your love life. A deeply profound conversation with your lover on Wednesday might leave you feeling vulnerable and exposed. At the same time, however, this type of dialogue will prove to you just how potent your feelings are for one another. After all, only love has the power to invoke this much intensity and insecurity. By Sunday however, you might really begin to feel unsettled. Your lover might insist on asking you to expose parts of yourself you're just not ready for. Be honest about your limits. 
 You have every reason to count your blessings as 2018 begins, Virgo. A stunning Full Moon in your 11th House of Hopes and Wishes on January 1 can herald a magical time for you where one of your most heartfelt dreams becomes reality. Soak up the emotional fulfillment of this lunation because it's rare and beautiful. This Full Moon in Cancer will make inspirational links with Neptune in your partnership sign, as well as with expansive Jupiter in your communication sector. A mystical and fortunate Grand Water Trine is the end result, which can only help you effectively communicate your wishes to a partner or anyone else in the world. You'll not only be heard, you'll be understood. Mid-month you might be ready to take on an extra layer of responsibility connected to one of your children or in your love life. Be willing to own your role in the current state of this. Recognize that, if you're able to contend with a change beyond your control near January 16, it might ultimately lead to an improvement in your connection with your child or lover. Shakeups are sometimes necessary in order to reach a breakthrough, and it does seem as if that needs to happen now. After January 17 you'll be in an enviable position at the office. Venus will be traveling through your 6th House of Work, and harmony between you and colleagues will prevail. If you're working on a team assignment, you'll know your contributions are appreciated. Single? This might be a time when you and one of your coworkers realize that there's no longer any point in denying the chemistry you share. Explore the romantic potential! 
 You have an interesting love story emerging this month, Virgo. It all started last month -- technically last year -- in December when stern Saturn moved into your romance sector. Until 2020, you are in the throes of what will become a time in your life that teaches you more about love than you've ever imagined. You are taking baby steps now that will help you truly define what you require in a romantic relationship. This is more than just your "must-haves" like tall, dark, handsome, etc... No, Virgo, this lesson will be much more than skin deep. Saturn here will command you to take love with great caution and sobriety, because you are now more aware than ever that the biggest risk in life happens when you give your heart away. And therein lies the potential for the greatest reward: true and lasting love. While Saturn does offer you the rich potential to achieve an enduring bond with someone who has real substance, before this happens you have a thing or two to learn about matters of the heart. In January you're ready to roll up your sleeves and begin this process in earnest. Venus will continue to tour your true love sector through January 17, helping to soften any harsh edges around these lessons for you. Also, on January 16, a New Moon in the same part of your chart will open up the door to new romantic opportunities if you're single, or bring in that new karmic lesson that Saturn promises in a current relationship. Are you ready? Of course you are. If there's any sign that is always on the clock, it's you. You've got this. 
 ADVERTISEMENT 
Sign up for HuffPost Horoscopes
There's a lot going on in your life right now. Get insight into what it all means with your daily horoscope.
