Here's a Brilliant Way To Hide Your Wrinkles And Aging
250 
When it comes to our personal makeup routines, it's easy to get stuck doing the same old thing. So we brought a real expert on the show to help us out. Fatima Thomas is a veteran MAC Cosmetics makeup artist with over 20 years experience. Check out her tips on hiding wrinkles, keeping your skin glowing, and getting that perfect smoky eye, all in the videos above!
"Smoke and Mirrors"
 There is only so much you can do to combat father time. Once a line appears on your face, "it can't go away," says Fatima. But that doesn't mean you can exercise a little human ingenuity and keep those wrinkles in check! Fatima gave us a few key tips to "disguise" your aging. 
Use something with SPF daily  While you can't erase a line, you can prevent the formation of more. "Sun damage is one of the biggest causes of lines on the face," warns Fatima. The solution? A heavy-duty Prep + Prime Face Lotion, which carries an SPF of 50. Fatima calls this the "big guns," so feel free to use something milder if you'd like. But wearing spf shouldn't be a special occasions thing; it really should be worn every day.
Use an optically diffusing product - While a line can never go a away, there are some other tricks to pull. One of them is using a product that optically blurs the light hitting your face. You can use a cream like this on your skin before using foundation. Fatima recommends the MAC Mineralize Time Check Lotion, a moisturizer that, through a true optical illusions, decreases the prominence of certain lines. Magic indeed!
Watch the rest of the interview and demo with Fatima here! 
 
 Learn about MAC product, or where you can find a MAC store near you, at MACcosmetics.com. And follow Fatima's Facebook Page for more beauty tips and tricks! 
You can submit all your questions for our future guests on Mondays with Marlo on Twitter and Facebook.
Add Marlo On Facebook: 
Follow Marlo on Twitter: 

Weekly Newsletter
Sign up to receive my email newsletter each week - It will keep you up-to-date on upcoming articles, Mondays with Marlo guests, videos, and more!
