Karel (Charles Karel Bouley) | HuffPost
BREAKING NEWS
Tap here to turn on desktop notifications to get the news sent straight to you.

 EDITION 
US
Karel (Charles Karel Bouley) is an entertainer, author and syndicated major market talk show host .He can be seen weekly on Free Speech TV on Karel's Life In Segments, and heard daily in The Karel Cast. He made history on KGO Am 810 San Francisco and KFI AM 640 Los Angeles with his on and off air partner, the late Andrew Howard. He is an entertainment reporter and film critic (having worked with KNX 1070 Los Angeles CBS, as a columnist for Billboard, The Advocate and others). There is an Karel Cast app at the App store for all of the Karel content and at his website reallykarel.com Karel often appears on the cable and news networks as a guest and takes his special brand of satire to the stage in sold out comedy club and cabaret versions of Karel Stands Up! He is the founder of KDW Productions, LLC, a multi-media production company for TV, Film, Stage, Recording, Web and other content production. Karel produced, directed and wrote a marriage equality PSA that won second place in GLAAD's "I Do" contest, being aired at OutFest and on national television, featuring 12 youth and a cameo by Thomas Jefferson. He also cowrote two music videos for the late Vesta Williams, producing many for international singer Thea Austin and co-wrote and co-produced his first two albums. Shortly after making history at the #1 Talk Station in the Country, KFI AM Los Angeles, Karel became a series regular on "The Ultimate Revenge" produced by Woody Fraiser and starring Ryan Seacrest. This improv reality show blazed a trail for shows like "Punk'd" and was aired on SpikeTV for three seasons. He is a blogger for the HuffingtonPost.com, joining in it's first year and has been a columnist for Billboard Magazine as well as the No. 1 GLBT newsmagazine The Advocate at Advocate.com and prestigious publications since the mid-1980s. His book of essays "You Can't Say That" is published by Alyson Press and his latest book, Shouting at Windmills, BS From Bush To Obama hits the stands in the Fall of 2011. Karel made history with his late partner (on and off air) Andrew Howard as the duo became the first openly gay male couple to host a major market talk show when they took over afternoon drive at KFI AM 640 Los Angeles (following Rush Limbaugh and Dr. Laura on the #1 talk station in the country). Upon Andrew's untimely death in 2001, Karel went solo and personally changed state law in California so he could pursue a wrongful death lawsuit on behalf of his partner. He is currently single and does his shows from his TuffStudio at the home they shared, Park Howard, in Long Beach, CA. He is joined there by his dogs and cat. To see his full bio go to his Website ReallyKarel.com
