PwC and The Huffington Post Ask: What’s Your Purpose? A Red Carpet Event
We’re just a few days away from the 89th Academy Awards, an evening in which years of hard work culminate in dreams coming true. Many would agree it’s quite moving to watch the acceptance speeches from those who take home OscarsⓇ. Through their words, we often have the opportunity to get to know the events that inspired the creation of a film or character, as well as the individuals who contributed to its development along the way. 
Previously, we spoke about the importance of diversity in bringing stories to life. It’s this same diversity in storytelling that brings awareness to personal triumph, struggles individuals face daily, and problems plaguing our society. However, storytelling at its best can also inspire action. It can help uncover a new desire to solve these same problems and, in turn, help people realize a purpose that lives inside of them.
At PwC, we constantly seek opportunities to help people find and live their purpose. So, come Sunday, while celebrities and studio heads are walking the red carpet, PwC will be hosting a red carpet event of its own. Only, instead of asking individuals what they’re wearing, we’ll be asking them to tell us more about their purpose―their reason for being. Joining us for our live event, hosted by Shannon Schuyler, PwC’s Chief Purpose Officer, and Jo Confino, Executive Editor, Impact and Innovation, Huffington Post, will be names many may know, including:
Brandon Victor Dixon, Tony and Grammy AwardⓇ Nominee, who currently plays the lead role of Aaron Burr in Broadway’s hit musical, Hamilton
Julia Ormond, Actress, Founder of ASSET, and first UN Goodwill Ambassador to combat Trafficking and Slavery
Mike Adams, Safety, Indianapolis Colts and Founder of The Team Adams Foundation
Dee-1, Artist
We admire greatly those individuals who use their platform to help enable change in ways that are personal to them, and we celebrate those individuals who create new platforms from the ground up, simply through their inner will to make a difference in their communities. That is why we’re also privileged to welcome these social entrepreneurs and educators who redefine what it means to turn the work they do for a living into the work that can be done for our world:
David Heath, Co-Founder & CEO, Bombas
Cisco Pinedo, Founder & CEO of Cisco Home, and Co-Founder of the non-profit Refoundry
Tiffany Anderson, Superintendent, Topeka Public Schools
Our Red Carpet with a Purpose will stream live on The Huffington Post Sunday, February 26 at 4 pm Pacific. Amidst a night filled with stars and glamour, we hope you’ll join us to take a moment to reflect on your passions and purpose, and the mark you want to leave in this world. 
©2017 PwC. All rights reserved. PwC refers to the US member firm or one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, and may sometimes refer to the PwC network. Each member firm is a separate legal entity. Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details. This content is for general information purposes only, and should not be used as a substitute for consultation with professional advisors.
