10 Things Healthy People Do Before Bed
Want better well-being? Try sleeping your way there.
Healthy people know that logging Zs is a vital part of their wellness routine, so they prioritize it accordingly. Below are a few bedtime tricks you can steal from them so you can wake up well-rested and ready to tackle the day.

CSA-Archive via Getty Images

1. Shower.
Body temperature is crucial in regulating sleep, according to sleep scientists. Showering at night could help aid in that process. The warm water has a powering-down effect so-to-speak, helping you feel relaxed as you crawl in between the sheets as well as improve your sleep quality. 
2. Meditate.
Calm your mind with a few moments of meditation. The practice has numerous health benefits, including better sleep. Try reciting a few mantras before drifting off to sleep tonight and you'll reap the benefits tomorrow.
3. Journal.
Having a hard time drifting off? Write it out. Research shows writing something that's stressing you out and physically throwing it away can help clear your mind. Not only that, journaling has numerous mind-boosting powers. Experts even recommend it as a way to help you sleep.
4. Drink water.
Alcohol isn't conducive to a good night's rest. While a nightcap may make you drift off faster at first, research shows it actually disrupts your sleep throughout the course of the night. Try swapping that glass of wine for a glass of water. You'll wake up hydrated and with a better night's sleep under your belt.
5. Brush those teeth.
The American Dental Association recommends that you brush your teeth twice a day. If you don't, plaque and bacteria can build up pretty fast, making your breath foul and putting your mouth health in jeopardy. Yuck.
6. Work out.
Sweat for your sleep. Not only does moving your feet help your health and attitude, research shows that exercise can help you get a better night's rest. Looking for a few nighttime workout ideas? Try one of these.
7. Ditch the devices.

Screens are a bedroom no-no. What seems like a harmless bedtime habit is actually wreaking havoc on your rest. Studies show the blue light emitted from our phones, laptops and TVs can disrupt our sleep cycles. Even a few minutes of scrolling through Instagram may be harmful. If you depend on your device to wake you up, try leaving your phone out of the bedroom and using a regular alarm clock instead.
8. Eat smart.
Old tales have you believe that eating before bed is bad for you, but it's all about how you snack. In fact, some foods before bed may even help regulate your blood sugar and prep you to catch those Zs. Got the late night munchies? Try nibbling on some kiwi. Research suggests the fruit may help boost your sleep quality.
9. Find the best place for Fido.
Experts stress that sleeping with your pet may disrupt your sleep, but emerging research shows that Fido or Fluffy may help your shuteye. It comes down to what type of sleeper you are. If you tend to wake up easily, it may be best to keep your furry friend out of your way. The point is to make your bed a haven for sleep, whatever that may be.
10. Crawl in at a reasonable hour.
The National Sleep Foundation recommends getting seven to nine hours of sleep per night, so what time you hit the hay certainly matters. If you want to get a good night's rest, try going to bed at a time that's going to optimize your amount of sleep.
Ultimately, prioritizing those Zs doesn't have to be difficult -- and the benefits outweigh the preparation. You'll thank yourself in the morning.
Also on HuffPost:

BEFORE YOU GO
