Get up to speed with the latest developments - CNN
Story highlights
8,914 cases; 4,447 deaths so far from Ebola, WHO tweets
NBC medical correspondent says she's sorry for breaking quarantine order
Dallas nurse with Ebola is "clinically stable" and got blood transfusion from Ebola survivor
Disposal of incinerated waste from Ebola victim Thomas Eric Duncan's apartment is blocked
 (CNN)
NBC medical correspondent Dr. Nancy Snyderman apologizes for violating quarantine. The husband of the Ebola-stricken Spanish nurse lashes out. A U.N. worker being treated for the disease in Germany dies. And the World Health Organization tweets that 8,914 Ebola cases and 4,447 deaths have been reported. 
With multiple developments under way, here's what you need to know Tuesday to get caught up on the latest:
U.S. DEVELOPMENTS



Duncan's waste disposal blocked
A judge has granted a temporary restraining order blocking the disposal in a Louisiana hazardous waste landfill of incinerated waste from the Texas apartment where Ebola patient Duncan stayed. The company that incinerated the waste told CNN it had followed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines and had no plans to move the waste to Louisiana.
70 caregivers involved
About 70 staffers at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital were involved in Duncan's care, The Associated Press reports. On Monday, CDC Director Tom Frieden said, "We do not today have a number of such exposed people or potentially exposed health care workers."


JUST WATCHED
Patient at risk for Ebola in Kansas
Replay
The blame game begins
The Agenda Project, a liberal advocacy group, has released an online ad that interlaces self-described "disturbing footages of the Ebola outbreak" with a mash-up of top Republicans -- including those tied up in crucial midterm contests and potential 2016 candidates -- saying the word "cut." The ad describes how the CDC saw its discretionary funding cut by $585 million from 2010 to 2014 and the National Institutes of Health has faced $446 million in cuts during the same period.
WEST AFRICA DEVELOPMENTS

Chocolate companies join fight
Much of the production of the world's largest chocolate companies comes from West Africa, and the companies are worried the virus will disrupt production. Nestlé and Mars say they have already responded to a call from the World Cocoa Foundation, a nonprofit that helps small cocoa farmers. The group plans to disclose Wednesday how much it has raised. Others in the group include Hershey, Godiva, Ghirardelli, General Mills and Mondelez International. 
IN OTHER COUNTRIES

Ebola patient dies in Germany
A U.N. worker being treated for Ebola in Germany has died. The Sudanese man had contracted Ebola while working in Liberia, the St. Georg clinic in Leipzig said. 
Husband pens scathing letter
Teresa Romero Ramos, a nurse's assistant in Spain who contracted Ebola, is in critical condition and is having trouble breathing, authorities said. In a scathing letter, her husband said she received only 30 minutes of training in putting on protective gear and called for the resignation of Madrid's regional health minister. "Please explain to me how one puts on a protective suit, since unfortunately my wife doesn't have a master's degree in that," he wrote.
CNN's Dana Ford, Catherine E. Shoichet and Anna Maja Rappard contributed to this report.
Paid Partner Content
