'Bye': Terrified family tweeting inside Aleppo says farewell
A Syrian woman who gained fame through a Twitter account in her daughter's name that shows the brutal horrors of life in Aleppo, posted a sad farewell on Sunday. 
 "Under heavy bombardments now, can’t be alive anymore,” she posted. "When we die, keep talking for 200,000 still inside. Bye." 
The army got in, this could be our last days sincerely talking. No Internet. Please please please pray for us.- Fatemah #Aleppo
— Bana Alabed (@AlabedBana) November 27, 2016
 The woman, and her 7-year-old daughter, Bana, whom the account is named after, gained viral fame just a few months ago sharing gritty and heartbreaking posts of what life is like for children trapped inside the bombardment of Aleppo. 
 But she told NBC News that Sunday’s bombardment was "the hardest day." NBC News has previously only referred to her as Fatemah, out of concern for her safety. 
 "(Bana) wants to live and peace returned,” she said in a direct message. "She wants real help for the murder stopped." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7-Year-Old Aleppo Girl Tweets Daily Struggle to Live Amid Bombings 1:57 
 autoplay autoplay 
 Hours after her goodbye tweet on Sunday, Fatemah said her home had been destroyed during a night of bombings. She shared a photo of a dust-covered Bana, usually smiling and joyful, looking bemused and shell-shocked. 
 “Tonight we have no house, it’s bombed & I got in rubble," read the tweet, which was "signed" by Bana. "I saw deaths and I almost died." 
Tonight we have no house, it's bombed & I got in rubble. I saw deaths and I almost died. - Bana #Aleppo pic.twitter.com/arGYZaZqjg
— Bana Alabed (@AlabedBana) November 27, 2016
 This week, the account's tweets became panicked and frequent as bombs fell closer to their home. On Thursday, Fatemah shared a photo of Bana and her brothers, Mohammed, 5, and 3-year-old sister Noor reading J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter and trying to find a moment of peace before the bombing started. 
Hello my friend @jk_rowling, I started reading your books now, my heart is for you. Thank you. - Bana #Aleppo #StandWithAleppo pic.twitter.com/MHtOIFzwuI
— Bana Alabed (@AlabedBana) November 24, 2016
 But by that evening, she and her family were mourning the death of a friend and his daughter who’d been killed when a rocket struck nearby. 
 According to a United Nations report, nearly a million Syrians are living under siege in Aleppo, and officials have described the situation as "a slaughterhouse." This Thanksgiving, Scott Dayton became the first U.S. serviceman to be killed in Syria, according to defense officials.
