Melania Trump doesn’t owe us anything
The post-Weinstein Golden Globes was an exercise in hypocrisy
Since news of President Trump’s alleged affair with porn star Stormy Daniels broke, here’s what we know of Melania’s reaction: nothing.
Yes, she canceled her trip to Davos at the last minute, citing immovable conflicts in her famously light schedule. But as she has since the campaign, Melania Trump remains a cipher. She hasn’t done a one-on-one profile with a major news outlet. She picked an admittedly curious platform, cyberbullying, but hasn’t really done much for the cause. She doesn’t give soundbites.
On Thursday, as her husband met with British Prime Minister Theresa May at the World Economic Forum, Melania made an unannounced visit to the Holocaust Museum in DC, then flew south to the couple’s Mar-a-Lago estate.
While her default position has always been obvious — Melania doesn’t have much interest in being first lady — she’s also made it clear she’ll do what she wants when she wants, and her husband can answer for himself.
Could anyone imagine, say, Hillary Clinton sending such messages to Bill — and us? Indeed, one of Hillary’s greatest liabilities wasn’t just the unflagging defense of her husband’s womanizing but her own role in publicly sullying his accusers’ reputations.
It’s part of why she lost to Trump: Our potential first female president, running on her feminist bona fides, couldn’t call out Trump’s disgusting “grab them by the p—y” remark lest it boomerang on her and Bill. Same when Trump brought three of Bill’s accusers to the second presidential debate — an expert bit of shadowboxing that left Hillary unable to call out Trump’s misogyny.
These were yet more frustrating examples of her inauthenticity and they helped cost Hillary her life’s ambition. How different her trajectory might have been had she divorced Bill post-White House.
And even though Melania Trump stays quiet, there doesn’t seem to be much daylight between her public and private personas.
As first lady, she’s unprecedented in many ways — first nude model, first immigrant, first third wife — but none more so than her refusal to play along. She’s more interested in being a mom than holding a ceremonial office. Save the occasional White House statement, rumors about her marriage, her moods, her state of mind go unacknowledged. She refuses to answer for her husband. Whatever thoughts she has in her head are not for public consumption.
Some corners of the media want Melania to be more vocal, more active, to defend herself and her husband, to justify her marriage. But as she has made abundantly clear: Melania Trump doesn’t owe us anything.
Many before her never wanted to be first lady, all the way back to Martha Washington, but only Melania Trump, odd beneficiary of this Black Swan presidency, has treated the “office” as it is: meaningless and unnecessary, ornamental at best, sexist at worst, something to be abolished. A wife shouldn’t have to give up her life in service to her husband’s ambitions.
Politics aside, all women should appreciate that.
