Palin: Rahm Emanuel should be axed for ‘retarded’ comment
Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin AP 
Former Alaska governor and 2008 Republican vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin posted a note on her Facebook page late Monday calling for President Obama to fire his Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel for comments he made that she said were offensive to children with developmental disabilities.
In the Facebook posting entitled “Are You Capable of Decency, Rahm Emanuel?,” Palin called for his firing for comments attributed to him in a Jan. 26 Wall Street Journal article where he called plans by liberal groups to run ads against moderate Democrats “F—ing retarded.”
“I would ask the president to show decency in this process by eliminating one member of that inner circle, Mr. Rahm Emanuel, and not allow Rahm’s continued indecent tactics to cloud efforts,” Palin said in the posting. 
“Just as we’d be appalled if any public figure of Rahm’s stature ever used the “N-word” or other such inappropriate language, Rahm’s slur on all God’s children with cognitive and developmental disabilities – and the people who love them – is unacceptable, and it’s heartbreaking,” the post continued. 
Emanuel has reportedly apologized for his remark. Politico’s Ben Smith reported Tuesday that Emanuel called Tim Shriver, Chairman and CEO of the Special Olympics last Wednesday and apologized for his comment. 
“Rahm called Tim Shriver Wednesday to apologize and the apology was accepted,” a White House official told Politico, adding, “the White House remains committed to addressing the concerns and needs of Americans living with disabilities and recognizes that derogatory remarks demean us all.”
The apology was first reported by online news oganization Disability Scoop last week.
Palin, whose youngest son Trig has Down syndrome, brought up the issue of children with special needs frequently on the campaign trail in 2008. In her speech to the Republican National Convention in St. Paul-Minneapolis, Palin promised families of special needs children that they would have a friend and advocate in the White House if her ticket was elected. 
Emanuel apologized later today to Special Olympics chairman Tim Shriver for using the word. 
On March 19, 2009 President Obama himself made headlines for a joke on the “Tonight Show” with Jay Leno that landed him in hot water. 
In describing a bowling game on the campaign trail where he scored a measly 129, Obama said, “It’s like — it was like Special Olympics, or something.” 
A White House spokesman was forced to release a hurried statement which said: “The president made an off-hand remark making fun of his own bowling that was in no way intended to disparage the Special Olympics. He thinks the Special Olympics is a wonderful program that gives an opportunity for people with disabilities from around the world.”
At the time, Palin responded by saying: “I was shocked to learn of the comment made by President Obama about Special Olympics. This was a degrading remark about our world’s most precious and unique people, coming from the most powerful position in the world… I hope President Obama’s comments do not reflect how he truly feels about the special needs community.”
