January 21, 2018
METROPOLITAN
A photo essay on Page 7 this weekend about the death of David Orr refers incorrectly to Masha Hamilton, who was among the family members with Mr. Orr when he died. Ms. Hamilton is his ex-wife, not his wife.
ARTS & LEISURE
The dance item in the Week Ahead column on Jan. 7 misstated the name of an organization that holds an annual arts conference. It is the Association of Performing Arts Professionals, not the Association of Performing Arts Presenters (the latter is the organization’s old name, which it no longer uses).
BOOK REVIEW
A picture caption on Jan. 7 with a review of two books about how literature has shaped human society misstated the location of the Anna Amalia Library. It is in Weimar, Germany, not Leipzig.
TRAVEL
The 52 Places to Go list last Sunday misstated the name of a new hotel in Iceland. It is the Retreat at Blue Lagoon Iceland, not the Moss Hotel (Moss is the name of the hotel’s restaurant). The list also misstated the name and year of a cyclone that hit Fiji. It was Cyclone Winston, not Watson, and it hit in 2016, not 2015. The list also described incorrectly the area of an item about Baja, Mexico. The item covers the East Cape and the neighboring Corridor, not just the East Cape. And the list, using information from a representative of a new Seattle museum, misidentified the place. It is the Nordic Museum, not the Nordic Heritage Museum.
•
The Getaway column last Sunday, about what travelers can expect in 2018, included outdated information about the status of two states’ compliance with the Real ID Act. New York and Louisiana are among the states that have been granted extensions to comply with the act’s minimum security standards; they are not under review for renewed extensions. The extensions were granted after the article was published.
•
An article last Sunday about new lodging options around the world misidentified the country where Quito is. It is Ecuador, not Peru.
SUNDAY BUSINESS
An article last Sunday about Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, misstated his age. He is 54, not 53.
•
Because of an editing error, two picture captions with an article last Sunday about the radioisotope Molybdenum-99 referred incorrectly to its role in medical diagnostics. It is used to make an imaging agent that is injected into patients; it is not injected directly into patients.
REAL ESTATE
Last week’s What You Get column about homes costing around $250,000 misidentified Ohio City. It is a neighborhood of Cleveland, not a suburb.
•
Last week’s cover story about seniors taking on roommates misidentified an elder-rights activist who died in 1995. She was Maggie Kuhn, not Maggie Khun.
SUNDAY STYLES
The Encounters column last Sunday, about Pete Holmes, the star of the HBO show “Crashing,” misstated the title of a television program on which Mr. Holmes made an appearance in 2010. It was “Late Night With Jimmy Fallon,” not “The Tonight Show With Jimmy Fallon.”
THE MAGAZINE
An article on Dec. 31 about the comedian and activist Dick Gregory referred incorrectly to the status of Chicago’s Playboy Club in the 1960s. It is not the case that the club was racially segregated at that time.
•
An article on Jan. 7 about the New York City subway referred incorrectly to an October 2017 service change made after a Yankees game. Trains moved from the N to the Q line, not from the M to the Q. And a picture caption with the article overstated what is known about the food that a rat picked up on the tracks at 125th Street. It was not a Moon Pie.
•
An article on Jan. 14 about the online trivia contest Learned League misspelled the name of the author of “The Decameron.” It is Boccaccio, not Bocaccio.


For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.
A version of this correction appears in print on January 21, 2018, on Page A4 of the New York edition with the headline: Corrections.
