Top--Ranked Halep Into Final 8 at Aussie Open
MELBOURNE, Australia — The Latest on Monday from the Australian Open (all times local):
6:30 p.m.
After successive first-round exits, top-seeded Simona Halep is going deep into the draw at this year's Australian Open, advancing to the quarterfinals by beating Naomi Osaka 6-3, 6-2.
Halep, who could lose her No. 1 ranking if she doesn't win the title here, extended her record of not having lost a fourth-round match on hard courts at a Grand Slam since the 2013 U.S. Open — she's 10-2 in round-of-16 matches.
She had considerably less trouble beating Osaka than her third-round match, when she needed 3 hours, 45 minutes and saved triple match point to beat Lauren Davies.
_____
5:35 p.m.
Just for something different (not), Roger Federer is through to the final eight at Melbourne Park.
The 19-time Grand Slam champion beat former top-ranked junior Marton Fucsovics 6-4 7-6 (3), 6-2 in an afternoon match at Rod Laver Arena.
Federer reached the quarterfinals at Melbourne Park for the 14th time, extending his own record. He also reached his 52nd Grand Slam quarterfinal, extending his lead over Jimmy Connors, who had 41.
Federer had never played the 80th-ranked Fucsovics before Monday. But Federer had played the 25-year-old Fucsovic's coach, Attila Savolt — he beat Savolt at the 2002 Australian Open.
Tomas Berdych, who beat Fabio Fognini in straight sets earlier Monday, will be Federer's quarterfinal opponent. Federer leads Berdych 19-6 in career meetings.
_____
3:20 p.m.
Tomas Berdych is back in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open for the seventh time after a 6-1, 6-4, 6-4 win over Fabio Fognini.
Berdych has been this far at Melbourne Park for seven of the last eight years. The only time he's failed to reach at least the quarters was last year when he lost in the third round to Roger Federer.
The 19-seeded Czech veteran could play Federer again in the next round if Federer wins his fourth-round match against Marton Fucsovics later Monday.
Berdych is 6-19 against Federer and hasn't beaten the Swiss star since 2013.
_____
3:15 p.m.
Angelique Kerber extended her winning streak to 13 matches with a frustration-filled 4-6, 7-5, 6-2 victory over Hsieh Su-wei, advancing the 2016 champion to the Australian Open quarterfinals.
Kerber overcame Hsieh's array of chip and drop shots off the Taiwanese player's unorthodox two-handed grip. At times, Kerber was frustrated with the shot selection by Hsieh, who had beaten Wimbledon champion Garbine Muguruza in the second round.
Hsieh saved two match points on her serve in the seventh game of the third set, forcing Kerber to serve out the match in the next game. She clinched the match with a forehand to the open court.
Kerber will play American Madison Keys in the quarterfinals.
_____
12:20 p.m.
U.S. Open finalist Madison Keys has advanced to the Australian Open quarterfinals with a 6-3, 6-2 win over eighth-seeded Caroline Garcia of France.
Keys, who didn't play at Melbourne Park last year because of off-season wrist surgery, is the only American woman left in the draw. The only American man, Tennys Sandgren, plays Dominic Thiem later Monday.
The 17th-seeded Keys should move back into the top 15 on the WTA rankings with her win Monday.
In the quarterfinals, Keys will play the winner of the later fourth-round match between 2016 Australian champion Angelique Kerber and Hsieh Su-wei.
_____
11:15 a.m.
Six-time champion Novak Djokovic, 2017 winner Roger Federer and 2016 champion Angelique Kerber will look to book quarterfinal spots on Day 8 of the Australian Open at Melbourne Park.
Federer has an afternoon match Monday on Rod Laver Arena against former top-ranked junior Marton Fucsovics, while Djokovic plays a fourth-round night match against Hyeon Chung. Kerber takes on Hsieh Su-wei.
Djokovic and Federer could meet in the semifinals.
Under mostly sunny skies, 2017 U.S. Open finalist Madison Keys opened play at Rod Laver Arena against eighth-seeded Caroline Garcia.
The forecast high temperature was about 26 Celsius (79 Fahrenheit).
_____
More AP coverage: www.apnews.com/tag/AustralianOpen
