Russian Court Closes Foundation of Aleksei Navalny, a Kremlin Critic
The opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny in the Moscow offices of his foundation this month. Credit Mladen Antonov/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

MOSCOW — A Moscow court on Monday ordered the closing of a foundation supporting the activities of Aleksei A. Navalny, the country’s leading opposition politician, moving quickly in a case filed only this month by the Justice Ministry.
The court order came before a series of rallies in more than 90 Russian cities and towns, scheduled for Sunday and organized by Mr. Navalny and his supporters.
The foundation, the Fifth Season of the Year, has been used by Mr. Navalny to collect donations that finance campaign materials, salaries and offices in 84 regions across Russia, among other weapons in his drive against corruption and the workings of the Kremlin under President Vladimir V. Putin. More than 145,000 Russians have donated $4.9 million to the foundation over the past 13 months, Mr. Navalny says.
At the end of December, Russian election officials barred Mr. Navalny from running in the presidential election scheduled for March, citing his suspended sentence in a fraud case that he and his supporters have denounced as politically motivated.
Advertisement
In response, Mr. Navalny announced that he would turn his candidacy into a campaign for a boycott of the presidential election, and he called on his followers to take part in street protests. That, he added, was what led to the court case against his foundation.
Mr. Navalny and others have noted that even though Mr. Putin’s re-election is a foregone conclusion, the Kremlin would still like to see a high turnout, as that would cement his legacy as one of Russia’s greatest leaders. In that context, a boycott becomes a very delicate issue for Mr. Putin, Mr. Navalny said.
“We wanted to take part in the election, but they did not let us, so we will campaign against this election,” Mr. Navalny said in the video. “You cannot consider Putin’s reappointment an election.”
The Justice Ministry said in court that the foundation had listed a wrong official address, that it was illegally spending money on Mr. Navalny’s presidential campaign, and that it had violated a law regulating the use of personal data. The judge, Irina Afanasieva, reached her decision in less than three hours.
“We have 30 days to appeal it,” Leonid Volkov, Mr. Navalny’s campaign manager, wrote on Facebook after the court’s announcement. “Until then, we continue our work.”
Mr. Navalny built his career on exposing graft in the higher echelons of the Russian government. Unlike many other Russian opposition politicians, he has openly accused Mr. Putin of involvement in corrupt activities.
