CNN Profiles - Cyril Vanier - Anchor - CNN
About 
Cyril Vanier is an anchor for CNN International based at the network's global headquarters in Atlanta. He anchors Europe morning editions of 'CNN Newsroom' Friday through Sunday. 
Vanier comes to CNNI from France 24, where he previously served as executive producer, anchor and international correspondent. During his 10 years at France 24, he reported on major international stories from the terror attacks in Europe to conflicts in the Middle East. Vanier also wrote and presented France 24's flagship shows -- The News, The F24 Interview and The Debate, where he moderated an hour-long live debate on international issues with four guests. 
Vanier has covered a number of major international breaking news events. He anchored live coverage of the terror attacks in Paris in November 2015, as well as terror attacks across West Africa in Mali, Ivory Coast and Burkina Faso. He also covered the Charlie Hebdo killings in January 2015, the surprise resignation of FIFA president Sepp Blatter and the terror attacks at Tunisia's Bardo museum and Sousse beach. 
Other key events that Vanier reported on include the U.S. presidential campaigns and elections in 2008 and 2012, 2012 French presidential election, Arab uprisings in 2011, the War in Afghanistan and war crimes trial of Radovan Karadzic at The Hague.
Vanier's coverage of the Libyan uprising was nominated for several awards including the Albert Londres award, Bayeux War Correspondents Award and the FIGRA award in 2011.
Prior to joining France 24 in 2006, Vanier wrote and voiced stories for Reuters weekly TV show Africa Journal and briefly worked as a producer for CNN's Paris-based correspondent Jim Bittermann. 
Vanier received a M.A. in Journalism and Political Science from the Institute of Political Science in Paris and a B.A. with honors in Law and Business from University of Warwick in England. 
He has dual nationality (France, St. Kitts and Nevis), and speaks fluent French and conversational Spanish.
