Danish Inventor Abused Kim Wall Before Killing Her, Indictment Says
Peter Madsen is accused of murder, sexual assault, and improper handling of a body. Credit Scanpix, via Reuters

COPENHAGEN — The inventor Peter Madsen is accused by the Danish authorities of binding and abusing the journalist Kim Wall on board his submarine before killing her, according to an indictment released in full on Tuesday.
Mr. Madsen has given shifting explanations for what happened to Ms. Wall, 30, a prolific Swedish journalist who disappeared after boarding the vessel on Aug. 10 in Copenhagen to interview him, and whose torso was found on a beach south of the city on Aug. 21.
Most recently, he admitted to dismembering her body, but he said that she had died in an accident.
In the indictment, however, prosecutors say he brought a “saw, sharpened screwdrivers, straps, strips and pipes” to the submarine before the trip, arguing that these were part of a plan to kill Ms. Wall. He “abused her by hitting her, stabbed and cut her and he killed her after which he dismembered her body,” the indictment said.
The straps and pipes were tied to her torso and limbs to wear them down after he threw them overboard. The police investigation has not been able to establish the exact cause of death, but say that she was either strangled or had her throat cut.
Advertisement
The police said earlier that Ms. Wall had been stabbed repeatedly, including in her genitals, but had not previously said they believed that to have happened before her death.
Mr. Madsen was rescued and brought to shore near Copenhagen on Aug. 11. He was arrested shortly afterward and has since been in police custody.
At one point, he said Ms. Wall had been killed by a blow to the head from a submarine hatch. When divers eventually recovered her head and limbs in plastic bags, however, no such injury was found.
“My client read the indictment, and we’re both puzzled,” Betina Hald Engmark, Mr. Madsen’s lawyer, said on Tuesday. “It’s not quite what we expected, but we hope everything will come to light when the trial begins. The case should be prosecuted in court and not in the press. Some members of the press seem to forget that the prosecution hasn’t proved their case yet,” she said, declining to comment further.
The trial by jury is scheduled to start in Copenhagen on March 8. The verdict is expected on April 25.
Ms. Wall was a successful writer and reporter who had work published internationally, including in The New York Times. A memorial fund to support a young female journalist is being raised in her name.
