Jimmy Kimmel Jumps Back Into the G.O.P. Health Care Debate
Jimmy Kimmel said Congress should fund the Children’s Health Insurance Program without tying it to a short-term spending bill. He used a barista to illustrate his point. Credit ABC

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.
‘Bargaining’ CHIP?
Jimmy Kimmel leaped back into the debate over health policy on Thursday, urging Congress to fund the Children’s Health Insurance Program without tying it to a short-term spending bill. He used a favorite character to illustrate his point: the petulant barista.
 Video by Jimmy Kimmel Live
“This is a program that’s supported overwhelmingly by both parties, Republicans and Democrats, and all Paul Ryan and Mitch McConnell had to do is put it up for a vote, and it would have been a done deal,” Mr. Kimmel said. “But they decided to use it as a bargaining tool instead. And now we’re on the brink of the whole government shutting down.”
His assessment grazes past key details — and it didn’t account for the fact that on Thursday night, the House passed a bill that would fund CHIP for six years. But he is right that Congress has failed to renew this broadly popular program since it expired in September.
Mr. Kimmel also noted that President Trump had sent out a surprising tweet on Thursday, expressing support for extending CHIP indefinitely, rather than as part of a stopgap measure.
 CHIP should be part of a long term solution, not a 30 Day, or short term, extension! 
 — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) Jan. 18, 2018 
“Which happens to be 100 percent correct, but also happens to be 100 percent the opposite of what the White House said yesterday. So now these guys don’t know what to do — especially because it’s unclear whether the president understands that CHIP is a government program, and not a bag of cookies whose last name is Ahoy.” — JIMMY KIMMEL
The Punchiest Punchlines (Light Bulb Edition)
“Congress had 24 hours to pass a short-term spending bill if they want to avoid a shutdown. Trump told them to do their jobs, then went back to announcing the winners of a made-up awards show.” — JIMMY FALLON
“How many Donald Trumps does it take to screw in a light bulb? We’ll never know, because after he screws something he gives it $130,000 not to tell anybody.” — STEPHEN COLBERT, making a not-so-subtle reference to reports that Mr. Trump’s team paid hush money to a pornographic-film actress 
The Bits Worth Watching
Kids say the darnedest things — about the president.
 Video by Jimmy Kimmel Live
On “The Rundown,” Robin Thede recapped a week and a half of public speculation about an Oprah Winfrey presidency. “After 14 months of Orange Creamsicle, people thought it was high time we got some chocolate back in the West Wing,” she said.
 Video by BETNetworks
Enjoy the Weekend
Awards season continues with the Screen Actors Guild Awards this Sunday. You can follow our coverage at nytimes.com/arts. And the Times Late-Night Comedy Committee will be right back here on Tuesday.
Also, Check This Out

Off pitch: Frances McDormand in “Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri.” Credit Fox Searchlight Pictures

“Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri” took home a heap of awards at the Golden Globes, and much of its appeal lies in its apparent social awareness. But our critic writes that the film misses the mark on many of the issues it seeks to address.
