Talking the Talk: Bombshell Semioticians Take on Marilyn Monroe in PBS Documentary
It is Marilyn Monroe’s curse to be subjected to every manner of cultural-analytical grandstanding. She is the dislocation of identity, a candle in the wind, the postcoital promise, the American backyard, the sweet angel of sex, a resonance of sound in the clearest range of a violin, a deliverance, America itself.
If this sounds made up, tune in at least for the blowhard preamble to “Marilyn Monroe: Still Life,” which appears tonight on PBS as part of the “American Masters” series. It culminates with this observation: “the classical pimples of the adolescent working his first gas pump would also pump for her.”
Revolting. But this is what a certain kind of geezer pundit likes to do to Marilyn: smother her with language. The narration sounds like a terrible Norman Mailer rip-off except that it’s Mr. Mailer himself, professor emeritus of the University of Marilyn Blather. Like so many smart people recruited for documentaries, he drops his sense of humor and intones in that portentous, “would”-heavy way typical of programs about American culture. (“The mayo packet would change American drive-through cuisine forever.”)

Marilyn Monroe in 1954 at a photo shoot for “The Seven Year Itch.” Credit George S. Zimbel

All the jawing about pumping pimples is particularly distracting, given that the documentary is supposed to be about still photography. Monroe qualifies for an “American Masters” program, the press materials for this show say, because she was such a great subject for photographers. Moreover, she even had ideas about poses, clothes and settings, and thus was an artist and not just a luminous bowl of fruit. That seems fine, and provides yet another essay-worthy pretext under which it’s O.K. for the millionth time to stare at the four cartoony circles that were Marilyn’s breasts and eyes. Mm, circles ... in all different configurations ... .
Advertisement
But “Marilyn Monroe” also features no end of ashen-faced talking heads — many the age she would be now! — talking to the camera about beholding Marilyn, photographing Marilyn, sitting next to Marilyn in a taxi, wanting to sleep with Marilyn, feeling that they had a chance to sleep with Marilyn and worrying that they had missed their chance to sleep with Marilyn.
We get it. She was sexy. Now shut up, old men, and show more pictures, please.
AMERICAN MASTERS
Marilyn Monroe: Still Life
