January 18, 2018
INTERNATIONAL
The Dublin Journal article on Tuesday about a proposal to demolish the Gloucester Street laundry, one of Ireland’s infamous Magdalene Laundries, referred incorrectly to the attention given to the women in the institutions. Joni Mitchell sang about them in the song “The Magdalene Laundries.” It is not the case that “no one ever sang about the women of the laundries.”
•
An article on Sunday about Nice Leng’ete, a young woman who started a program in Kenya to create new rites of passage to replace female genital cutting, misstated how many girls she has helped. It is 15,000, not 50,000. The error was repeated in a picture caption.
NATIONAL
An article on Monday about the recent false missile alert in Hawaii misstated the time between the 1983 downing of a Korean Airlines jet and a false alert by the Soviet early warning system. It was 25 days, not three months.
BUSINESS DAY
An article on Monday about the outlook for the United States automobile industry in 2018 misstated the corporate title of Dan Ammann of General Motors. He is G.M.’s president; he is no longer its chief financial officer.
Advertisement
THE ARTS
A theater review on Jan. 9 about Robert O’Hara’s “Mankind” misstated a sequence in the play “Barbecue.” The drama includes a scene that begins with a white family and continues with a black family, not the other way around.
OBITUARIES
An obituary on Monday about the museum curator Kynaston McShine misstated part of the name of a feminist collective that was founded in response to the low number of women in his 1984 exhibition “An International Survey of Recent Painting and Sculpture.” Although they are known for wearing gorilla masks in public, they are the Guerrilla Girls, not the Gorilla Girls.


For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.
A version of this correction appears in print on January 18, 2018, on Page A21 of the New York edition with the headline: Corrections. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
