Forget It
Yolanda Holder, 59, is an ultramarathon racewalker. She walked nonstop, with nine other racers, in a seven-week ultramarathon around Thomas Edison Vocational High School in Jamaica, Queens, in 2017. Credit James Estrin/The New York Times

THURSDAY PUZZLE — A terrific New York Times Crossword debut by Alan Southworth, ably assisted by his collaborator, Ryan McCarty (for whom this is a sophomore outing).
My favorite part of this puzzle was that the theme kept me guessing until I finally got the revealer toward the bottom of the grid.
Today’s Theme
“Forget it!” Fuhgeddaboutit! NO WAY, which, incidentally, is the revealer at 69A! And if you look closely at the punny theme entries, WAY is what’s missing from what would otherwise be common phrases.
For example, at 17A, HIGH ROBBERY is the punny answer to the clue “Rooftop heist?” but it’s only so because our constructors have yanked the word WAY from HIGHWAY ROBBERY. Similarly, RUN A TRAIN is the punny, WAY-less answer to “Handle engineer duties?” when the common phrase is RUNAWAY TRAIN.
There are also a healthy number of twisty clues and fun entries here, giving this debut puzzle a really nice Thursday feel.
Tricky Clues
24A: Were you confused by “Diamond club”? Sounds like two card suits crammed together, doesn’t it? But what if we thought about baseball? Baseball has diamonds. And clubs, if you think about a BAT as a club.
49A: Yes, of course the answer to “Openings at a day spa?” is PORES. I will be in the corner here, wishing you clean and open ones and trying not to visualize that.
8D: French in the clue, French in the answer. The saison that lasts “tres mois” is summer, or ETE.
60D: This one cracked me up. You can “Wave to a math teacher?” and I am sure it will make his or her day, but in the noun sense, a “wave,” to a math teacher, can be a SINE wave.
Constructor Notes
Alan Southworth: Very excited to be making my New York Times Crossword debut today! A bit about me: I’m a 25-year-old energy market consultant/singer-songwriter/marathoner living in New York City. I found my way into the crossword community through a lifelong love of word games and puzzles (I grew up playing Scrabble and Boggle with my mom, as well as solving Sudoku and Ken Ken before bed), but didn’t really get into crosswords until college, where I met my collaborator, Ryan McCarty. Ryan and I were members of the Princeton University Glee Club and the Princeton Nassoons, the university’s oldest a cappella group, before beginning our crossword collaboration.
I started writing down crossword theme ideas in the “Notes” app of my phone during my commutes to work in 2015. Many of the early concepts I came up with revolved around phrases that lent themselves to literal interpretations involving a letter addition or removal (“DROP THE F” BOMB luckily never came to fruition …). But then NO WAY came to me and I realized dropping an entire word might result in some fresher “wacky” phrases. RUN A TRAIN was the first potential theme answer that I thought of, and with Ryan’s expert grid construction skills and some more theme answer brainstorming, I knew we were on the right track, so to speak.
Side note: As a runner, I was excited to use “Marathon leader?” as the clue for ULTRA, but I wasn’t sure if the Ultramarathon reference was too obscure for the general public. After a quick Google search eased my initial worries, I noticed the following blurb in the Wikipedia article for Ultramarathon:
“Since 1997, runners have been competing in the Self-Transcendence 3,100 Mile Race, which is billed as the longest official footrace in the world. They run 100 laps a day for up to 50 days around a single block in Queens, N.Y., for a total distance of 3,100 miles (5,000 km).”
This absurd race has been the topic of many conversations since finding out about it during my crossword research. Just thinking about the fact that Suprabha Beckjord ran the race 14 times (i.e. she spent over two years of her life running around a high school in Queens) makes my legs hurt …
Ryan McCarty: Excited for my second New York Times puzzle today, co-written with one of my (soon-to-be) groomsmen! For my day job, I work as a tech consultant at the SEC, and I have kept up my singing in three choirs and occasionally in some smaller ensembles in the D.C. area. Alan is the person who actually introduced me to The New York Times Crossword in college — we would often attempt puzzles together during breakfast, with varying degrees of success. Soon after I got interested in constructing puzzles and made a few for friends before submitting some to publications. Alan and I decided it would be fun to collaborate on a New York Times puzzle and, after a couple of attempts, we got an acceptance with this NO WAY puzzle. We hope you enjoy!
Your thoughts?
