‘A Time to Stir’ Evokes the Zeal of Columbia’s 1968 Protests
Credit Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times

For today’s college students, the 1968 Columbia University takeover that closed the campus and the violent eviction of the protesters by the police must seem like ancient history.
After all, a half-century retrospective for students back then would have evoked equally distant daily headlines about the 1918 global flu pandemic and American triumphalism wrought by Woodrow Wilson’s rescue of Europe in World War I.
Yet five decades after the demonstrations on the Columbia campus, the reflections of some of the participants reverberate in current events. Even the epigraph of a new anthology resonates:
“When the country, into which I had just set my foot, was set on fire about my ears, it was time to stir,” the author Thomas Paine wrote. “It was time for every man to stir.”
In “A Time to Stir: Columbia ‘68” (Columbia University Press), more than 60 participants and witnesses to the uprising provide impassioned, first-person accounts leavened by hindsight, but rekindled by stirring contemporary events.
The anthology is edited by Paul Cronin, who teaches at the School of Visual Arts. Mr. Cronin also directed a documentary of the same name about the Columbia protests, which were instigated by two incendiary grievances.
One was the Vietnam War, and the growing opposition to the university’s tangential relationship with the Institute for Defense Analyses, a weapons research think tank affiliated with the federal government.
The other was Columbia’s apparent tin-ear response to the sensitivities of black New Yorkers, epitomized by the construction of a gym that would usurp a portion of Morningside Park and be accessible to neighboring Harlem residents mainly through an ignominious back door (intended, actually, for their convenience, because of the park’s sloping terrain).
Bookended by a foreword (Paul Berman) and an epilogue (Juan Gonzalez), the collection suffers from the absent perspective of Columbia’s embattled administrators at the time. Unlike the students, many of whom were teenagers at the time, 50 years on, most of those school officials are now dead.
Also, the collection of essays, unlike oral history interviews, lack the give-and-take crossfire with an interlocutor to challenge specifics of what the authors choose to remember about the protests that led to the seizure of five campus buildings and the arrest of more than 700 students.
The essays appear in alphabetical order by surname, a bow, perhaps, to still-unrequited sensibilities.
The contributors include Neal H. Hurwitz, Jay Kriegel, Phillip Lopate, Mark Rudd and lesser-known figures, including the black students who mounted their own deliberately more civilized disobedience in occupying Hamilton Hall, and the police who responded to the protest.
The protesters were demonized (including in editorials published in The New York Times) as fractious, self-righteous radicals who resorted to militant disruption when other means of protest were still available and as absolutists, who often stifled dissent and fell short of reaching a consensus about what they stood for.
“We thought that militancy could become a strategy,” wrote Mr. Rudd, who was chairman of the Columbia chapter of Students for a Democratic Society in the spring of 1968, “when really it’s only a tactic which sometimes, occasionally, if you’re lucky, works.”
Similarly, Mr. Lopate observed that while the students’ demands were largely met, they proved to be mostly symbolic. “I don’t believe that righteous wrath necessarily trumps every other kind of moral authority,” wrote Mr. Lopate, a Columbia student who went on to become a professor in the university’s graduate writing program.
Karla Spurlock-Evans, a Barnard undergrad who occupied Hamilton Hall as a member of the Students’ Afro-American Society and went on to become dean of Multicultural Affairs at Trinity College in Hartford, wrote optimistically that the “swordplay between victory and sheer destruction” left her “deeply convinced that all things are possible when people with pure intentions and a shared sense of purpose come together.
“I gained a belief,” she added, “in the power of listening to others, of compromise, and of politics infused with love.”
