In London, Creative Types Celebrate an Old Architect's Restored Apartment
This week in a palatial square in London’s legal district, the private apartment of Sir John Soane — the eminent Bank of England architect who started life as a bricklayer’s son — opens to the public for the first time in 160 years. “It’s a significant piece of real estate expansion that adds an entirely new floor,” says the director Abraham Thomas of the chambers, which sit on the second story of the museum — Soane’s spectacular former home, library and Regency architectural practice in Lincoln’s Inn Fields.
Since his death in 1837, these lost rooms have been slowly converted into mediocre offices and, up until the end of World War II, accommodation for curators. Now Soane’s bedroom, bathroom, oratory, book passage and morning room have been gloriously reinstated, right down to the Pompeian red wallpaper. An intricate puzzle of clues from Soane’s meticulous inventories, and a series of watercolors he commissioned of the apartment as part of his architecture students’ training, have been painstakingly pieced together to reconstruct corridors, restore stained glass windows and return paintings precisely to their contemporary place.
The Tivoli Recess, a tiny-but-towering nook on the stairwell leading to the second floor, is the first stop. In 1829, Soane transformed the former closet into a miniature sculpture gallery showcasing riffs on his favorite Roman building, the Temple of Vesta at Tivoli, by contemporaries including Britain’s first modern sculptor, Thomas Banks. “Soane was great at creating these experiential architectural environments,” says Thomas of the cheek-by-jowl display. “The small space forces close inspection and amps up the experience of the objects.” Looking up at the elaborate skylights and domed ceiling depicting eagles battling snakes, you’d never guess its most recent incarnation — the staff restrooms.
Upstairs in the Model Room sits a vast cork rendering of the ancient site of Pompeii, exactly as it was unearthed in the eighteenth century, alongside pristine plaster models of Soane’s own neo-classical architecture. Formerly Mrs. Soane’s bedroom, it remained a shrine to his late wife for decades after her death, before he converted it into a teaching and display space for what remains one of the most important collections of classical architectural models in the world.
The first public tour of the apartment coincides with the opening of a new exhibition, “Inspired by Soane: I Found This And Thought of You,” which sees Manolo Blahnik, Paul Smith, Christopher Bailey and Zaha Hadid amongst those to create postcard artworks in response to the museum’s treasures. “Soane was radical, innovative and influential. He was so original as a collector, that in just three modest buildings he has created a collection to rival any in the world,” says Thomas of the wondrous antiquities and artworks by Turner, Hogarth and Canaletto housed at the Soane. “The hope is that the restoration will be a launch pad for the museum as a resource and a place of inspiration. It was always intended as a home with a public purpose, an Academy of Architecture.”
Soane’s Private Apartments and Model Room will be open to the public beginning May 19th. Access is only available through pre-booking, soane.org.
SIGN UP FOR T’S WEEKLY NEWSLETTER
The best of T, delivered to your inbox, every Friday. Sign up here.
