Amy Sohn on Life, and Motherhood, in Park Slope
Correction Appended
ONE recent afternoon, the writer Amy Sohn sat at the Third Street Playground in Prospect Park, Brooklyn, a few blocks from her apartment, and explained the central paradox of her neighborhood. “Every mother knows what a Park Slope Mother is, but no one thinks she is one,” she said.
Ms. Sohn was referring to the stereotype of the overprotective, militantly organic, so-called helicopter mom. Looking around the playground, there appeared to be a few in attendance.
“If you went to Pierrepont Playground in the ’70s, when I was there,” Ms. Sohn, 35, said, referring to the Brooklyn Heights neighborhood where she grew up, “the mothers sat on the benches, and let kids work things out. If you come here, you see parents on the structures. There’s a quickness to intervene. Shouldn’t we allow some degree of ‘Lord of the Flies’?”
As the mother of a 4-year-old girl, Ms. Sohn has logged countless hours on Park Slope’s playgrounds. Part of that time was no doubt spent making field notes for her new novel, “Prospect Park West” (Simon & Schuster), which was published last week and is set in the leafy Brooklyn neighborhood known for its gracious brownstones, liberal values and tendency to propagation.
She saved the eye-rolling for her novel. It’s filled with real locations like the Tea Lounge, a spacious coffee shop on Union Street, dubbed the Teat Lounge in the book for its open policy toward nursing. The central characters, all married with children, exhibit varying degrees of happiness with family life. One character, Rebecca, hasn’t had sex with her husband, Theo, in 16 months; another, the mother of a coddled son named Darby, is obsessed with buying an apartment in the coveted P.S. 321 school district. Ms. Sohn said her publisher imagined the book as “Desperate Slope Wives.”
The mix of social satire, interpersonal drama and urban glamour — there’s a movie star character, Melora Leigh, based in part on the actress Jennifer Connelly, who lived in a mansion on Prospect Park West until last year — drew the attention of Sarah Jessica Parker, whose production company optioned the novel for an HBO series.

LOCAL COLOR Amy Sohn's novel about the leafy enclave of Park Slope has offended some residents for its satirical portrait. "I still wouldn't want to live anywhere else," she said.

The book has also stirred the emotions of Park Slope residents, some of whom object to Ms. Sohn’s portrait of the area. The attractive female characters deem themselves too cool for the neighborhood (one thinks of it as “Park Slob”), while those who embrace the area are often characterized as smothering and semi-pathetic, reading self-help books like “Great Sex For Moms: Ten Steps to Nurturing Passion While Raising Kids.” Park Slope’s liberal values are also lampooned; a controversy erupts at the local food co-op over racial profiling.
For instance, this is the character Melora’s impression of a food co-op she has joined (it’s based on the famed Park Slope Food Coop on Union Street): “The Coop’s third-floor meeting room was fluorescent-lit and dingy and filled with a nauseatingly unattractive mishmash of hipster couples, Hasidic women ... all sitting in hard-backed black metal chairs. It reminded Melora of an A.A. meeting.”
When asked for her reaction to “Prospect Park West,” Susan Fox, the founder of Park Slope Parents, an online message board (also referenced in the book — a swinger couple uses it to find partners), identified herself as a “non-frumpy, non-cargo-wearing mom who actually has a good marriage, unlike PPW would have us believe.”
Ms. Sohn said she was surprised that some readers think she portrays Park Slope in a negative light. “I guess the book pokes fun at the more easily satirized aspects of the neighborhood, but I still wouldn’t want to live anywhere else.”
In fact, Ms. Sohn is as immersed as her characters in Park Slope culture. She and her husband belong to the food co-op, working their required monthly shifts. When pregnant, she shopped at Boing Boing, a local maternity store, and consulted the Park Slope Parents message board for advice on choosing a hospital for the delivery of her child.
And, she said, she wrestles with being an overprotective, permissive mother. “In theory, I don’t take any guff,” she said. “In practice, I’m uncomfortable with discipline. Not because I’m afraid to be the bad guy, but I don’t enjoy stressful interactions with my child.”
If some aspects of “Prospect Park West” seem like exaggerations, a number of elements are based on real life. Swingers did post on Park Slope Parents, to the outrage of parents who mostly use the site for advice. (“The whole thread is still there — it’s fascinating,” Ms. Fox said.) And the Tea Lounge’s nickname was coined by a friend of Ms. Sohn’s, a fellow Park Slope mother.

FIGURE STUDY Amy Sohn lives in a Park Slope walkup with her husband, Charles Miller, a painter, and their 4-year-old. Credit Piotr Redlinski for The New York Times

“I feel the book heightens Park Slope, for better and for worse,” she said. “You have a character who puts kneepads on her son to take him to the playground. You might shut your eyes a bit and say, ‘Oh, God, I hope that’s not true.’ But at the same time you have incredible real estate, restaurants ... a breast-feeding-friendly place.”
Still, Ms. Sohn said she has had difficulty establishing friendships with other mothers in the neighborhood, in part because her family’s set-up is different from what she sees as the “dominant caretaker model” in Park Slope — the husband works and the wife stays home with the child, at least for the first few years.
Ms. Sohn is the main breadwinner, and being a working mom has led her to feel alienated at times, she said.
“When a working mother meets an at-home mother, the at-home mother realizes you’re not available on call as a potential source of bonding and friendship,” Ms. Sohn said. “I never had the one fast friend as a mother. I’m still waiting.”
Ms. Sohn and Mr. Miller moved to Park Slope in 2004, paying around $600,000 for a two-bedroom third-floor walk-up in a co-op on a block between Eighth Avenue and Prospect Park West — prime north Slope territory, though Ms. Sohn prefers not to reveal the exact street.
“It feels comfortable and homey to me,” Ms. Sohn said, sitting at a small table in the living room a few days after her excursion to the playground. “I grew up in a 31-story high-rise, so I never lived in a floor-through apartment as wide and deep as this.”
The apartment has a graceful layout, and the sort of prewar details sought after by the characters that populate “Prospect Park West,” like a working fireplace and an antique wood radiator cover in the living room. The kitchen was recently renovated because Mr. Miller likes to cook. The walls are covered with his paintings — striking portraits of old-time boxers. A pair of boxing gloves dangles from the fireplace mantel.

The walls are covered with his paintings, like "Sammi Smith," above. Credit Piotr Redlinski for The New York Times

It’s a masculine look for a home where a 4-year-old girl is often running the floors. “I like the fact that it doesn’t feel like a day care center,” Ms. Sohn said. It’s difficult to be totally chic with a toddler, however. Asked about the peculiar, low-rise coffee table, Ms. Sohn explained that it has a chalk surface, which is used by the youngest in-house artist.
That Ms. Sohn has such concerns might come as a surprise to people who remember her “Female Trouble” column from the late-’90s in New York Press. In sexually explicit language, she chronicled her escapades as a single woman in New York — dates and dalliances with a litany of pale, wispy, downtown artist-types. One reader, in a letter to the newspaper, likened her writing to Penthouse Forum in that “I can’t believe it’s true, but I can’t stop reading, either.”
Ms. Sohn was a literary girl-about-town, but she said that even then she wanted a family. “When I was 25, I felt like a spinster,” she said. “That was where a lot of the comedy from my column came from — I wanted to marry every guy I met.”
In the span of two dizzying years, Ms. Sohn met and married Mr. Miller and became pregnant. Asked if she misses her old life, she said: “I don’t miss the anxiety. My joke is that the conversations around infant sleep are like the conversations around when-should-I-call. It’s like, ‘Last night he slept from 9 to 12, and then he woke up at 12.’ It’s the same as: ‘He said he’d call on Thursday. Then Friday came. By Saturday I called him.’ It’s ultimately very boring.”
Ms. Sohn said she and her husband have fallen into a comfortable routine of going out once a week — “just like Barack and Michelle” — to Park Slope restaurants like Al Di La and Franny’s, Although, she added, “I can’t call it date night, because if you call it date night you might as well shoot yourself in the head.”
The couple is considering having a second child, in which case they will need a larger apartment and will most likely move to the south Slope or Windsor Terrace, a familiar migration, Ms. Sohn said. “As you have more children and life gets more expensive,” she explained, “you get priced out and move south.”
In the meantime, she is working on a sequel to “Prospect Park West” that will feature many of the same characters and some new ones. They will no doubt lead high-drama lives and grapple with the issues of marriage and modern motherhood. But Ms. Sohn said the fictional versions should not be confused with their maker.
“I had to create characters that were struggling and had drama in their lives because I wanted to write a book that was interesting to read,” she said. “But I don’t regret that I became a mother or think that mothers are evil. It’s been, hands down, the single best experience of my life.”
  Correction: September 17, 2009  
 
An article last Thursday about Amy Sohn, who wrote a novel about Park Slope, Brooklyn, misstated the year that she and her husband bought a co-op there. It was 2004, not 2005.
A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D1 of the National edition with the headline: A Park Slope Novel Seems a Little Too Real.
