Clarence Thomas and 'Natural Law'
CAMBRIDGE, Mass.—  What is really at stake in the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court? While any candidate nominated to replace Justice Thurgood Marshall would likely accelerate the Court's rightward trend, Judge Thomas's adherence to "natural law" as a judicial philosophy could take the Court in an even more troubling direction. 
 Most conservatives criticize the judiciary for expanding its powers, "creating" rights rather than "interpreting" the Constitution. These critics talk of returning issues like abortion to democratically elected and politically accountable bodies. 
 Clarence Thomas, judging from his speeches and scholarly writings, seems instead to believe judges should enforce the Founders' natural law philosophy -- the inalienable rights "given man by his Creator" -- which he maintains is revealed most completely in the Declaration of Independence. He is the first Supreme Court nominee in 50 years to maintain that natural law should be readily consulted in constitutional interpretation. 
 When a child born today reaches voting age, Judge Thomas will be 61, still five years younger than Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist is now. By then, the nation will face many new issues -- new reproductive technologies, computer privacy, genetic engineering. 
 Might a Justice Thomas some day provide a fifth vote to hold that Congress and the states may not respond with measures contrary to natural law, as construed by the justices on the basis of their understanding of the rights "given to man by his Creator?" Whether that understanding coincides with specific religious teachings matters less than how it affects legislative power and personal liberty. 
 Consider abortion. Judge Thomas has called even the right of married couples to use birth control -- recognized by the Court 26 years ago in Griswold v. Connecticut -- an "invention." Unfortunately, he seems likely to help overturn Roe v. Wade. 
 But whether Roe v. Wade is overruled is only half the question. No less important is the kind of regime that would follow. The Court in a post-Roe world would probably debate whether the Constitution permitted states to ban the French abortion drug RU-486 and whether state abortion bans must contain life, health or rape exceptions. 
 In these debates, a Justice Thomas, for whom the right to privacy may seem anathema, might seek to replace Roe not with a system that strengthens states' rights, but with a decree that abortion is murder and that its practice or counseling cannot be permitted by any state. 
 Judge Thomas has already dismissed talk of states' rights as a "constitutional sideshow." He also endorsed Lewis Lehrman's 1987 American Spectator article, which argued that because abortion violates the "right to life" guaranteed by the law of God in the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution cannot tolerate even a neutral stance on the issue. To Judge Thomas, that extraordinary theological argument was a "splendid example of applying natural law" to define the "right to life" secured by the Declaration. 
 Or consider Judge Thomas's insistence that "economic liberties [ are ] a vital part of the rights protected by constitutional government." To be sure, judges today understand that certain economic rights, like the right to fair compensation when private property is taken for public use, are constitutionally guaranteed. 
 But the last time a Supreme Court majority invoked natural rights theories, some 80 years ago, the Court held that the Constitution protects such economic rights as the "liberty" of employers to conduct business free of health and safety regulations and minimum wage laws. 
 Libertarians, though, can take little solace: Natural law has most often been cited to justify moralistic intrusions on personal choice -- as illustrated by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger's appeal to "Judeo-Christian moral and ethical standards" in Bowers v. Hardwick, a 1986 case condemning oral and anal sex between consenting adults. 
 And, perhaps echoing the Declaration's language that "all men are created equal," the Court 120 years ago relied on the law of "nature" and "the law of the Creator" to deny a woman the right to practice law, deeming it the "paramount destiny and mission of woman . . . to fulfill the noble and benign offices of wife and mother." 
 Before the Senate decides whether to confirm Judge Thomas, they should explore the implications of his views about natural law as the lodestar of constitutional interpretation. With the power of Congress and of every state and local legislature hanging in the balance, the Senate cannot avoid sharing the responsibility for the fate of self-government in the U.S.
