Video Review: With the Rolls-Royce Ghost, a Pampered Ride for the Chauffeur, Too
THE vast majority of people buying cars fully intend to drive them. That’s not necessarily the case with the Rolls-Royce Ghost. Those buying one might slide behind the heated wheel — or they may not. According to Rolls-Royce, half are looking to be driven, a statistic not shared with Corolla (or many cars for that matter).
Frankly, the Ghost shares little with any car other than four tires and architecture based on a BMW 7 Series (the Bavarians have owned the classic British marque since 2003). Any captain of industry will agree that’s just smart allocation of resources. The iDrive interface (elegantly dressed in new graphics) is the only thing that even whispers Bimmer here.
Rolls-Royce’s 2015 models are Series II cars, a freshening of sorts. Perhaps you’ve recognized that the statelier grille is now framed by LED headlamps. No? Chalk it up to rarity. Rolls-Royce builds only 4,000 cars a year in Goodwood, England. You may never see a Ghost in person.
You’ll remember the day you spy one. The Double R wheel hub logos do not spin while driving, staying properly upright for all to admire. The Spirit of Ecstasy hood ornament tucks beneath the grille once the car is shut down, most likely to keep a kidnapping from occurring. Ghost remains regal, even without its grace.
Some cars have chassis that are solid as a safe. The Ghost feels like driving a vault. It is solid. It is heavy. It is the anti-Miata. Ghost remains composed in corners, but physics will not be denied. Rich with understeer, it’s not eager to slice through curves.
Where the Ghost fully delivers is comfort. This rolling enclave tames road imperfections like no other automobile. Fuel economy? If you must know, the Ghost gulps the premium stuff at an average of 15 miles per gallon.
The cabin is a craftsman’s showcase. If it looks like metal, it is. Door panel speakers have no trim rings; supple hide simply stops perfectly at their edge. Live in a soggy climate? There’s built-in umbrella storage in the front doors, and 85 percent of the cars are bespoke, so feel free to match the umbrella panels to the paint color. Of course.
Those who are driven rest in back seats that massage, cool and toast. Passengers are in full control with a second iDrive unit in the folding armrest. Watch a movie or read the owner’s manual on the LCD screens in case you plan on driving yourself someday. Long wheelbase models offer even more legroom. Wood “picnic tables” fold from the seat backs, begging for a Grey Poupon joke.
The Ghost is a car for the 1 percent of the 1 percent, if even that. At $383,000 as tested, the Rolls was a rock star as I drove about for a few days. Fitting, because you need to be one, in any profession, to own a Ghost.
A version of this article appears in print on October 16, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Rolls-Royce Ghost: A Pampered Ride for the Chauffeur, Too.
