With Just Months Left to Live, a Boss Offers a New Mission Statement: Seize the Day
Chasing Daylight How My Forthcoming Death Transformed My Life By Eugene O'Kelly 179 pages. McGraw-Hill. $19.95.
A good chief executive should be able to deal frankly and effectively with any contingency. Seldom has this been demonstrated more bluntly than it is by "Chasing Daylight," one chief executive's how-to book about the last subject on which he wanted to give advice. After his inoperable brain cancer was diagnosed in May, Eugene O'Kelly, the 53-year-old American chief executive of the accounting firm KPMG, deployed the tactics he knew best. He decided to write a common-sense guidebook on how to die.
Enjoy every sandwich: that phrase came from the terminally ill singer-songwriter Warren Zevon (who died in 2003) and is well on its way to becoming the baby-boom mortality mantra. Mr. O'Kelly (who died on Sept. 10) sends that same stop-and-smell-the-roses message from a different place. "Chasing Daylight" takes its title from a golf metaphor and was written by a controlling, orderly, privileged and powerful man who sometimes felt like an eagle on a mountaintop. Then, to his astonishment, the mountain disappeared.
"As for those considering taking the time someday to plan their final weeks and months, three words of advice," he counseled: "Move it up." In his case, that meant trading a schedule of nonstop business appointments made months ahead of time for no clue about what each new day would bring. He had to leave his job, abandon thoughts of the future and jettison the habits of a lifetime. But he was determined to create new habits and to turn his death into one last success.
To his credit, Mr. O'Kelly knew this optimism was peculiar. He knew it was strange to be making a to-do list two days after learning he had three brain tumors; he also knew it was strange to count nearly a thousand people to whom he needed to say goodbye. But he clung to the role of good, methodical business manager because it worked for him. He would rethink dying from the ground up, so to speak. Then he would live differently during 1 percent of the 10,000 days he thought he had coming, having assumed he would survive into his late 70's. About 100 days were all he had left.
"Chasing Daylight" is a weep waiting to happen: the maudlin possibilities of this story are huge. But Mr. O'Kelly did not take the Mitch Albom route ("Tuesdays With Morrie," "The Five People You Meet in Heaven"): instead, he described his situation with dignified restraint. And he did not become one of the world's great philosophers. But he wound up voicing universal truths not often found in business or how-to tracts. He shared them simply and clearly. And yes, he made a success out of this final mission.
Readers may wonder how honest the book is in sustaining its positive tone. (Mr. O'Kelly refers to his grief and rage, but he does not emphasize either.) Then there is the question of how a man losing his faculties could describe these losses so clearly. (Andrew Postman is listed as co-writer. Corinne O'Kelly, the author's widow, helped write part of the book too.) Readers may also note that KPMG had troubles with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Mr. O'Kelly's watch. He chose not to make them part of his memoir.
But "Chasing Daylight" is far from uniformly flattering. It reveals a chilly, manipulative side to Mr. O'Kelly -- or, as Mrs. O'Kelly puts it, "a 'cut to the chase' approach that had made him so successful in business but could sometimes come off as abrupt in personal interactions." When he set out to bid farewell to everyone he knew, one at a time, the meetings were arranged strictly on his terms. But it is the crumbling of this very rigidity that makes the book affecting. The author taught himself new survival strategies when the habits of a lifetime failed him.
Mr. O'Kelly described discovering the world around him -- nature, connection with loved ones, living in the moment -- as if he had never seen it before. Possibly he hadn't. But once the bad news came, he searched for ways to savor what was within his grasp without yearning for the impossible. His religious faith was a great help in this -- even if on his first postdiagnosis visit to church, the sermon happened to be the one about the camel, the eye of the needle, the rich man and heaven.
The book describes the medical decline that began almost without symptoms, but soon took its toll. Mr. O'Kelly's vision began to dim. His handwriting deteriorated. His ability to complete simple tasks declined, but he remained very much the businessman even in the face of these challenges. Increasingly, needlessly complicated technology infuriated him: "I just wanted to use my phone to call people. Was that too much to ask?" From this same narrowing perspective, he discovered the all-but-new experience of doing only one thing at a time.
In the course of saying goodbye, he would sometimes invite a friend or acquaintance to take a stroll in the park. This "was sometimes not only the final time we would take such a leisurely walk together, but also the first time."
In hard-won retrospect, he wondered what it would take to make healthy people slow down and heed his quotation of Jonathan Swift: "May you live every day of your life." Mr. O'Kelly did his best to echo that benediction.
