Apples With Pedigrees Selling in Urban Edens
LEBANON, N.H. - IT was like seeing a duchess on the subway. There in the produce section of an Upper East Side market amid the mass-produced Red Delicious and McIntosh apples, was a display of Ribston Pippins. Their skin was a palette of red, gold and brown worthy of Rembrandt, their pale yellow flesh shockingly aromatic.
In England, where the variety originated three centuries ago, its complex taste is considered so distinctive that it is known as the Ribston flavor. But in the United States, old varieties like this have been grown on only a few trees by the several dozen apple farmers with collections of such rarities.
How did the Ribston get to the supermarket? In a sense, necessity.
Facing competition that threatened to put them out of business, Stephen Wood and his wife, Louisa Spencer, the owners of Poverty Lane Orchards here, gave up on commercial apple growing and planted 20 acres of Ribstons and other high-flavored "uncommon apples," as they call them. For several years they have sold some in New York, and this season they are distributing them nationally for the first time.
Commercializing apples like Ashmead's Kernel and Esopus Spitzenburg, prized by connoisseurs but fiendishly hard to grow, might seem as foolhardy as trying to revive the telegraph, but for Mr. Wood the allure of a profitable niche outshines the pitfalls. There are plenty of these, which became clear on a visit to his farm, a patchwork of hillsides in the Connecticut River Valley.
On a misty late-September afternoon Mr. Wood directed his best pickers to the tricky task of this year's Ribston harvest. The crop was scanty. Even worse, half the apples had water-core, a disorder that leaves parts of them saturated with liquid. The workers laboriously culled these out, and from 120 trees they picked just one bin, about 700 pounds of prime fruit, a ninth of the yield from standard varieties.
"This apple drives me nuts," Mr. Wood said. "It's stunningly rich, but we can't plant any more until I solve the water-core problem. It may just be a matter of adding something like a calcium spray."
Mr. Wood, 50, has been fascinated by apples since he was 10, when his father, a family doctor, bought the farm (named for the adjacent road, christened by an itinerant preacher disappointed by the stingy alms offered there). While Mr. Wood was earning an undergraduate degree in medieval history at Harvard, where he also met his wife, he took over the production of apples, then mostly McIntoshes and Cortlands, shuttling between farm and campus.
He prospered through the 1980's, as his crisp, aromatic, northern-grown McIntoshes brought premium returns. Then overproduction and low prices hit the United States apple industry, striking hardest at the relatively small and low-yielding orchards of New England. Apple acreage in New Hampshire dropped to 2,100 last year from 3,500 in 1993. Mr. Wood struggled to grow traditional high-quality apples, but supermarket chains increasingly demanded waxed, preternaturally large fruit.
"By 1992 it became abundantly clear that the business that we'd been in was just not going to work," said Mr. Wood, who has kept 20 acres of commercial varieties for pick-it-yourself and farm-stand sales.
He could have sold his land, shifted to hot new varieties or focused on value-added products and family entertainment, like petting zoos. But the farm was too far from big cities to draw traffic, and he and his wife were determined to keep their land productive and do what they loved: raise apples.
"If we have to come home smelling like scented candles to persuade ourselves that we're growing fruit for a living, we ought to rethink what we're doing," he said one evening in his office.
So for Mr. Wood, as for other farmers who have gambled on specialty produce, desperation was the mother of anachronism. Luckily, from the early 1980's he collected varieties for an experimental orchard.
"I was just fooling around," he said during a tour of the test planting, near his barn. "Then it occurred to me that I ought to take what I've learned about these weird varieties and really plant them.'
Mr. Wood chose varieties with exceptional flavor that appealed to him and to customers and that flourished on his farm. The area's long, harsh winters ruled out some varieties, like Newtown Pippin.
Several of the 10 kinds he planted were russets, which have matte brown skin, making them hard to market. But many are extraordinarily beautiful: Golden Russet often gleams with oranges and golds evoking the patina of ancient glass and hinting of the cidery sweetness within.
Ashmead's Kernel is indeed small and drab, and crops poorly, but compensates with its astonishingly concentrated sweet-tart taste, reminiscent of fruit drops.
Mr. Wood decided to grow Calville Blanc d'Hiver, a classic French dessert and cooking apple from the 16th century, for its rich, effervescent flavor and distinctive ribbed form. "It helps if an apple has a story," he said, as he ambled down a row of Calville trees, his black dog, Luther, at his side.
He calls his specialty apples "uncommon," not "heirloom," because many commercial varieties are more than a century old, and two of his are fairly recent: Hudson's Golden Gem, a large, juicy russet, originated in 1931, and Wickson, small as a crab apple but ultrasweet, in 1944.
Mr. Wood planted thousands of antique apple trees from 1993 to 1998, but a run of attacks by hungry beavers, deer and porcupines set them back several years. It was not until 1999 that Poverty Lane Orchards shipped significant quantities of rare apples to distributors in the Northeast.
The peculiarities of his varieties both vex and intrigue Mr. Wood. His favorite -- it was also Thomas Jefferson's -- is Esopus Spitzenburg, bright red, with sky-high levels of sugar balanced by floral acidity. But its limbs grow chaotically, shading out the branches below, and it often produces "blind" wood, with no buds.
"It's the tree from hell," Mr. Wood said, waving his arms at a row of unruly Spitzes as if to say, "Behave!"
"From my perspective, however," he added, "the apples are sufficiently valuable that we put up with this nonsense."
Much of that value comes from the Spitzenburg's contribution to the critically praised hard cider that Mr. Wood and his wife produce under the name Farnum Hill. Serendipitously, several of the uncommon apples help make superb hard cider, even the blemished fruits unsuited for fresh sale.
Picking at the right time is crucial. The day of the Ribston harvest, Mr. Wood and his right-hand man, Fitzgerald Campbell, sampled a dozen fruits of Pomme Grise, a flat, nutty-flavored russet, spitting out the bites like wine tasters. The fruits were still a bit starchy, so Mr. Wood decided to wait.
Two days later the crew returned to harvest, grasping the fruits gently and pouring them gingerly out of picking sacks into bins. One bin was worth $400 to Mr. Wood, he said, compared to $80 for McIntoshes.
Pomme Grise is a midseason treat, good to the end of October, but three high-flavored varieties, Spitz, Ashmead and Golden Russet, all harvested in the last week, were traditionally stored for a month or more to let starch convert to sugar, acidity drop and subtle aromatic compounds develop.
Mr. Wood said he would like to offer apples at peak maturity, but after Thanksgiving citrus dominates produce displays.
He employs none of the technologies commercial packers use to enhance shelf life and crispness, often to the detriment of aroma: waxing, controlled atmosphere storage and SmartFresh, a recently introduced ethylene-inhibiting hormone.
Demand for Poverty Lane's apples has increased gradually, said David Russell of Cheshire Company, a Worcester, Mass., broker that handles the fruit. But produce managers often confuse the unfamiliar apples with cheaper kinds, and some of the antique varieties become mealy if not properly refrigerated. Still, Frieda's, the specialty produce distributor, is handling the apples for the first time this year, sending them as far as the Central Market chain in Texas.
Mr. Wood has proselytized for antique varieties to other growers, including Apple Hill Farm of Concord, N.H., which has five acres, and the seven-acre Alyson's Apple Orchard in Walpole, N.H. In Brattleboro, Vt., Ezekiel Goodband of Scott Farm has grafted rare varieties on 25 acres; most are just coming into production.
So antique apples may someday be as available as heirloom tomatoes, and that is just what Mr. Wood fears.
"What worries me most," he said, "is that after we develop a demand, some fool will plant these varieties in a place where they don't grow very well and kill our market."
Where the Pippins Are
POVERTY LANE ORCHARDS' "uncommon apples" are sold for $1.99 to $3 a pound in the New York area at the following stores:
NEW YORK CITY -- Agata & Valentina, Balducci's, Garden of Eden and Gourmet Garage.
LONG ISLAND -- Schmidt's Market, Southampton.
WESTCHESTER COUNTY AND CONNECTICUT -- Hay Day Country Farm Markets.
NEW JERSEY -- The Market Basket in Franklin Lakes and Cafasso's Fairway Market in Fort Lee.
Uncommon apples are also available through Halloween at the Poverty Lane Orchards stand at 98 Poverty Lane, Lebanon, N.H.; (603) 448-1511; www.povertylaneorchards .com. Apples are $1.25 a pound.
Apple Hill Farm sells many of the varieties at its stand at 580 Mountain Road, Concord, N.H.; (603) 224-8862; www.applehillfarmnh.com. By mail order 12 apples are $31.50, and 24 apples are $47.50 (shipping is included). DAVID KARP
