McCain Has Made His Pick and Is Set to Tell on Friday
WASHINGTON — Senator John McCain has decided on his running mate, two Republican strategists in contact with Mr. McCain’s campaign said Wednesday. He is expected to reveal his choice at 11 a.m. Friday at a rally at a basketball arena in Dayton, Ohio.
Mr. McCain’s decision is known only to his small inner circle of advisers, no more than three or four people, who have refused all public discussion on the matter. Republicans close to the campaign said that the top contenders remained the same three men who have been the source of speculation for weeks: former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, Gov. Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota and, possibly, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, independent of Connecticut.
It was unclear how seriously Mr. McCain was considering his good friend Mr. Lieberman, who favors abortion rights and whose selection could set off a revolt among delegates at the Republican National Convention next week in Minneapolis-St. Paul as well as a furious backlash among Christian conservatives, a crucial voting bloc of the Republican Party. But as recently as Tuesday, Mr. McCain was said to still be entertaining the idea of Mr. Lieberman, who was Al Gore’s running mate on the Democratic presidential ticket in 2000.

Tim Pawlenty Credit Paul J. Richards/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

Under this option, Mr. McCain’s choice of Mr. Lieberman would help him appeal to women, independents and conservative Democrats in a tough year for Republican candidates. “It’s really alive in McCain’s mind,” said a Republican consultant familiar with some of the campaign’s deliberations.
Other Republicans said they suspected that whatever Mr. McCain’s personal views, his aides could be pushing Mr. Lieberman with reporters as part of a disinformation campaign to stir interest in the selection and to make it appear as if Mr. McCain, a longtime opponent of abortion, was open to all possibilities and was therefore more of an independent candidate.
Some Republicans also said that Mr. Lieberman had not caught fire as a campaigner in 2000 and that he would alienate more voters, particularly evangelicals, than he would attract.
Mr. McCain’s inner circle was described as divided on the choices, although one Republican close to the campaign said there had been no raging internal debate. Whatever the aides’ opinions, Mr. McCain was said to have made the decision on his own.

Joseph I. Lieberman Credit Georgy Abdaladze/Associated Press

Mr. Romney remained the most talked-about possibility on Wednesday among party officials and on cable television, not least because of the theory that he would help Mr. McCain win Michigan, a crucial state in this election and where Mr. Romney’s father was governor.
But Mr. Pawlenty gained some currency as the day wore on because of what were perceived as Mr. Romney’s downsides, particularly his wealth as many Americans face financial struggles and his past as a venture capital manager. Mr. McCain came under attack from Democrats on this front after he was unable to say in an interview last week how many houses he owns.
(The McCain campaign said he had four houses, and the Obama campaign said eight, counting those owned by Mr. McCain’s wife. Mr. Romney said Wednesday that his houses amounted to “one less than John Kerry,” the 2004 Democratic presidential nominee, which would be four.)
“Twelve houses between them, two rich guys, it’s almost like shooting fish in a bucket,” said Ed Rollins, a Republican strategist who led Mike Huckabee’s presidential campaign this year.

Mitt Romney Credit Jack Dempsey/Associated Press

Politico.com reported Wednesday night that Karl Rove, the longtime political guru to President Bush, had urged Mr. Lieberman in a recent telephone conversation to withdraw his name from consideration, a request that Mr. Lieberman denied.
Mr. Rove, who has close ties to several of Mr. McCain’s senior aides, has long considered the sorts of evangelical voters who might be alienated by Mr. Lieberman’s selection to be crucial to the Republican coalition.
A person close to Mr. Lieberman, who would speak only on condition of anonymity when reached by telephone Wednesday night, repeated a similar account, and said, “Lieberman laughed at the suggestion and certainly didn’t do it.”
A spokeswoman for Mr. Rove denied the report.
A version of this article appears in print on August 28, 2008, on Page A24 of the New York edition with the headline: McCain Has Made His Pick and Is Set to Tell on Friday.
