Two New Wonderlands, Richly Imagined and Full of Peril
Photo

THE WONDERLING
 By Mira Bartók 
450 pp. Candlewick Press. $21.99.
(Middle grade; ages 8 to 12)
One of the chief pleasures of children’s books is the central role friendship so often plays — a lonely character moves from isolation and misunderstanding toward the warmth and security of true kinship with others. It’s immensely satisfying to watch young people take control of their own fates, navigating outer peril and inner struggle in order to find connection, as do the protagonists of two enchanting new middle grade books.
The hero of “The Wonderling,” Mira Bartók’s debut children’s novel, is a groundling, a human and animal hybrid, known only by the number stamped on the tag that hangs around his neck. This sensitive soul, part boy, part fox, has only known the grim confines of Miss Carbunkle’s Home for Wayward and Misbegotten Creatures, a joyless place where music is forbidden and the only greenery is the moss growing on the stone wall that surrounds it. He doesn’t know who he is or where he comes from, and — most poignantly — wonders why he has been born at all.
After he is befriended and rechristened Arthur by a plucky fellow groundling, Trinket, the friends manage to break out of their miserably cosseted world and plunge into the great unknown, the world that’s so vast he “had to close his eyes from time to time in order to adjust to its size.” He arrives in the shining city of Lumentown and then, in the most opulently strange and inventive passages of the book, descends to the underworld beneath the city, where the clanging from mines and factories echoes through fog “thick as soup and brown as umber,” slugs leave glowing silver trails in the darkness, and hundreds of crows’ eyes glitter like stars at the top of a chamber.
Too often the bullies in the story speak in stale clichés rehashed from the movies, and chance or magic can sweep in too conveniently to save the day. But these weaknesses don’t diminish the power of the grand set pieces and exhilarating twists, or the pleasure of humble, exquisite moments. A home inside a tree smells like “pine wreaths, cedar chests, rosemary and mushrooms from deep within the woods.” Soon after their escape, Arthur and Trinket settle in a mossy spot between tree roots and gaze up at the night sky: “A cool wind blew, and the two friends pulled the blanket tight around them.” Momentum builds toward a thrilling crescendo and, rarest of all, a wholly satisfying ending that still whets the appetite for a sequel.

Photo

TUMBLE & BLUE
By Cassie Beasley
390 pp. Dial. $17.99.
(Middle grade; ages 8 to 12)

The delicious villain of “Tumble & Blue” is a mystical golden alligator who lurks in the swamp outside town and delivers asides to the reader in a velvety, malign purr. His dark menace is foil to the pure hearts of Blue Montgomery and Tumble Wilson, the winning duo of Cassie Beasley’s charming, warm-hearted and richly imagined tale.
Blue and Tumble have each been brought by their parents against their will to the poky town of Murky Branch, Ga., a town so small that Tumble thinks it could “bore the heroism right out of her.” But Tumble is an eternal optimist: “Her parents had taken her life and given it a good hard shake, but that didn’t mean Tumble was going to fall to pieces.” Dead set on being a hero and inspired by the incantatory slogans of the infomercial celebrity Maximal Star, Tumble is undeterred even when every rescue she attempts ends in disaster. “I prefer,” she says upon meeting Blue, “to think of myself as potentially extraordinary.”
Blue, on the other hand, is usually blue. The victim of a generations-old family curse, he just can’t win at anything — spelling bees, video games, sports, fights — and is gloomy after being recently dumped at his grandmother’s house by his constitutionally impatient racecar-driver father. Then Tumble catapults in, a breath of fresh air, zealously intent on saving Blue.
As droves of eccentric, meddlesome relatives turn up to wait for a red moon to rise, when all will be called into the swamp to fulfill or contest fates handed down long ago, only the courage to face truths about themselves — truths as dark as the swamp itself — will save Blue and Tumble. In places the story staggers under the weight of unwieldy plot mechanics and gratuitous emotional explication. But these are flaws of exuberance, and it’s hard to dwell on them while you’re rooting for characters as disarming as these two.
Nadia Aguiar is the author of the Lost Island of Tamarind trilogy.

A version of this review appears in print on November 12, 2017, on Page BR20 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Dangerous Wonderlands.
