2015 GMC Yukon SLT and Yukon XL Denali Review
The 2015 GMC Yukon SLT and Yukon XL Denali Credit General Motors

They line up a dozen deep behind the Capitol in Washington, mostly black General Motors S.U.V.s — Chevrolet Tahoes and Suburbans or their GMC equivalents — waiting to shuttle important people to important places. Or to lunch at Chipotle.
Look! There goes Joe Biden in an armored Suburban.
Here are the latest GMCs, the Yukon (called Tahoe, over at the Chevy store) and Yukon XL (a.k.a. Suburban). Except for blunter noses and bits of trim, the GMCs are practically identical to the Chevys.
All four models have been redesigned for 2015, but they haven’t changed all that much. They aren’t pretending-to-be-tough crossovers; rather, these are genuine, hulking S.U.V.s with big V8s under their hoods, heavy steel ladder frames under their heavy steel bodies and hitches at their tails, ready to tow up to 8,500 pounds. Both have room for six to nine people in three rows of seats — or one V.I.P., four aides and a four-person security detail.
The same basic vehicle platform is also the basis for the Cadillac Escalade and the stretched Escalade ESV. But missing from this new generation are the pickup-bed versions previously sold as the Chevrolet Avalanche and Cadillac Escalade EXT. If anyone misses those weird truck-S.U.V. combos, their grief is well hidden.
At first sight, the differences between the Yukon and the Yukon XL are subtle. From the front doors forward, the sheet metal is identical. The most immediately apparent difference is that on the Yukon, with a 116-inch wheelbase, the bottom of the back doors arch over the rear wheel wells; the rear doors of the Yukon XL, which has a 130-inch wheelbase, are cut straight down to the rocker panel.
 Video 
I drove a well-equipped 4-wheel-drive Yukon SLT — the mainstream trim level — on 20-inch wheels. It carried a sticker price of $65,515 and was powered by a 5.3-liter version of G.M.’s latest small-block V8 engine, with direct fuel injection, variable valve timing, 16 pushrods and a cylinder deactivation system to stretch fuel mileage under light loads. The engine is rated at 355 horsepower when running on gasoline and 380 horses on E85 fuel, which contains up to 85 percent ethanol. A conventional 6-speed automatic is the only transmission.
I also tested a Yukon XL Denali on 22-inch wheels, also with 4-wheel drive; with a sticker price of $77,470, it represented the glistening top of the line.
Denali models — both the regular and XL versions — are powered by a 6.2-liter V8 shared with the Escalade. It’s rated at 420 horsepower whether on straight gas or E85. The Denali uses the same transmission as other Yukons but is geared for better acceleration.
Passing up the options ladled on my test trucks will knock the prices down significantly. A base rear-drive Yukon SLE is $47,330, and the Yukon XL SLE starts at $50,030. But even the cheapest Yukon Denali is $63,675.

Window sticker for the 2015 Yukon test vehicle. Credit General Motors

The front suspension on both models comes straight from G.M.’s pickups, whereas the rear suspension is a solid axle on coil springs. The coil springs are better for ride quality than the leaf springs of the pickups, but not as sophisticated as the all-independent systems of competitors like the Ford Expedition and Mercedes-Benz GL-Class.
So on bumpy surfaces there’s some noticeable jiggle to each Yukon’s back end. It’s not terribly distracting, but it’s noticeable, especially on the shorter version. On smooth surfaces the XL’s ride motions are somewhat more restrained (particularly with the Denali’s magnetic-ride shock absorbers) but these are massive machines weighing from 5,400 to 6,000 pounds. Bumps don’t stand a chance.
The XL’s additional length rewards third-row passengers with 10 extra inches of legroom, as well as an added 24 cubic feet of cargo space behind the third seat. It’s also easier to get in and out of the XL’s third-row through the larger rear doors.
But all that length makes the XL clumsy to drive in the city. There’s plenty of power, the steering is accurate if a bit numb, the transmission works brilliantly and the brakes do an amazing job dealing with so much mass. Yet despite backup cameras and radar parking aids, parallel parking takes courage.
While a 116-inch wheelbase isn’t short, the not-XL Yukon is a tidier and more manageable package. At 17 feet long, it’s almost three inches shorter than the Mercedes S-Class sedan, and despite having less power than its longer Denali brother, feels nimbler. It’s not exactly fun to drive, but it commands the road as smaller vehicles cannot. You feel practically invulnerable.

Window sticker for the 2015 Yukon XL Denali test vehicle. Credit General Motors

These S.U.V.s have evolved. They look better, inside and out, than before. Some careful carving has given the flanks of the Yukons character and LED lighting at front and rear gives them a strong presence at night.
They get slightly better fuel economy, too, with their more advanced engine technology. The Yukon 4-by-4 is rated at 16 m.p.g. in town and 22 on the highway; estimates for the larger XL Denali 4-by-4 are 14/20 m.p.g.
Neither comes across as apologetic for its size or shy about its grandeur. But I’d say the subdued three-section grille of the regular Yukon is handsomer and more dignified than the Denali’s chrome colander.
No matter the trim, the majestic front seats are tremendously comfortable. And the individual chairs in the second row — benches are available — were only slightly less so. The second and third rows fold flat.
G.M. may be reeling after recall upon recall, but its recent progress in quality is obvious. The grade of materials in these big, hugely profitable vehicles is high enough to be German. There’s more flash and shiny bits than in a Mercedes or Audi, but everything feels supple and looks well finished. The Denali’s partly digital dashboard is nice enough, but it is simply a re-creation of the ordinary Yukon’s conventional instrumentation.
Of course, every imaginable entertainment device is available in either S.U.V., and an onboard Wi-Fi network with 4G LTE Internet connectivity will be available this year.
According to the 2010 census, there are more than seven million families with three or more children. Throw some dogs and a boat into that mix, and you can see why there is demand for vehicles like these. Big families still make up the core base of customers, even if they don’t need armored doors or a security detail.
A version of this review appears in print on July 13, 2014, on Page AU1 of the New York edition with the headline: Room for the Family. Bodyguards, Too.
