The Meat Question, by the Numbers
Welcome to the Climate Fwd: newsletter.  Sign up here to get it in your inbox.

Credit Claire O'Neill/The New York Times

Your burning climate question: Meat and global warming
Do you have questions about climate change? We’re answering them in this newsletter. Send us yours via the form at the bottom of our climate Q. and A. This one was sent to us from Sue Pfeffer in Toronto:
How much of the problem is caused by methane gas emitted from raising farm animals for the meat industry?
The impact of agriculture, a category that includes everything from growing lettuce to raising livestock, is tricky to express because the gasses produced — mostly methane and nitrous oxide — have much more warming potential than carbon dioxide but also dissipate more quickly. According to the latest thinking, though, farming is responsible for the equivalent of 574 million metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions in the United States each year and 56 million metric tons in Canada. 
That’s about 8 percent of each country’s total greenhouse gas emissions.
Methane is increasingly drawing attention from researchers because its worldwide levels have doubled in less than 10 years after remaining flat since the 1990s. The reasons behind the increase are not well understood.
In the United States, 42 percent of agricultural emissions come from animal agriculture. Two-thirds of those gases are directly emitted by ruminants: animals like cows, buffalo and sheep that use bacteria in their stomachs to ferment food. That allows them to eat foods, like grasses, that humans can’t. 
It also creates a lot of methane when they burp and pass gas. Some non-ruminants — like pigs, horses and mules — also release methane, but not as much.
These calculations of livestock emissions exclude the fertilizers used to grow food for livestock and they typically don’t look at alternative-use scenarios, like what would happen if we removed cows from grasslands and let wild ruminants like bison and deer take over.
Worldwide, livestock accounts for between 14.5 percent and 18 percent of human-induced greenhouse gas emissions. The percentage is lower in the United States in part because our overall greenhouse gas emissions are so much higher than other countries: In the United States we emit 16.5 metric tons per person per year compared to a worldwide average of about five metric tons. Most of America’s emissions come from power plants and transportation, with each accounting for a third of the total.
That’s a look at the numbers. We plan to write more about meat, agriculture and climate change this year.

Credit Claire O'Neill/The New York Times

The U.S. missed a deadline. So?
The Trump administration has blown past a Jan. 1 deadline to update the United Nations on America’s progress toward cutting planet-warming greenhouse gas emissions and preparing for the consequences of climate change.
Tardiness in submitting the two reports — one is required every two years under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change treaty signed by President George Bush; the other every four years — is not unheard-of.
But critics say the missed deadline underscores the disdain with which the Trump administration views the worldwide effort to rein in global warming. They also argue it undermines the United States’ push for transparency in countries like China.
“No matter their differences, previous administrations agreed on at least one thing: Countries must be transparent about their emissions, as well as their actions to address climate pollution, and should report on these issues regularly and comprehensively,” Nathan Hultman and Paul Bodnar, two Obama administration climate change officials, wrote in a recent op-ed in The Hill.
They described the reporting as critical to developing trust that all countries are acting on their promises to cut emissions. Even the Trump administration, which is still negotiating the terms of the Paris climate agreement until it can withdraw from the pact in 2020, has made ensuring that countries like China meet transparency guidelines its top priority.
At climate talks in Germany last year, for example, American and Chinese officials led a working group on transparency during which the Trump administration pushed for all countries to meet the same standards when it comes to verifying emissions cuts.
The State Department said in an emailed statement that it still intended to submit the reports and that they were “under development.”
The United States shares its laggard status with 13 of the 44 wealthy nations required to submit biennial reports. Developing countries have a different timetable. China’s next biennial report is due next year, though a broader progress report from China was due in 2016 and has not yet been submitted.
It’s probably a safe bet that the report, when and if it comes, will be quite different from the Obama administration’s final update. That 80-page document boasted about policies the United States was enacting to curb greenhouse gas emissions. Almost all of them are being rolled back under the Trump administration.

Farmers near Daraa, Syria, in 2010. As in Iran, the government encouraged thirsty crops like wheat. Credit Louai Beshara/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

Water stress as a warning sign
What do so many of the world’s trouble spots have in common? Water stress.
Whether caused by nature, human mismanagement, or both, a water shortage or a competition over water can be an early warning signal of conflict ahead. Just think of Somalia, Nigeria and Syria.
And as I explain in my latest story, you can add Iran to the list. In that parched nation, in one of the most parched regions in the world, a water crisis, long in the making, has fed popular discontent.
In the era of climate change, water stress and its downstream consequences are drawing greater attention these days, including from American military analysts. In a recent report, a panel of retired generals and admirals warned that a shortage of fresh water would emerge as “a growing factor in the world’s hot spots and conflict areas.”
You can see how in the full story here.
We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. Please email thoughts and suggestions to climateteam@nytimes.com.
If you like what we’re doing, please spread the word and send this to your friends. You can sign up here to get our newsletter delivered to your inbox each week.
And be sure to check out our full assortment of free newsletters from The Times.
What on Earth Is Going On?
Sign up for our weekly newsletter to get our latest stories and insights about climate change — along with answers to your questions and tips on how to help.
