Volcker Suggests Ways to Refine Bank Regulations
Paul A. Volcker, the former Federal Reserve chairman who is leading President Obama’s Economic Recovery Advisory Board, called Wednesday for fundamental changes in the regulation of financial instruments and institutions, especially of those firms whose collapse can put the financial system at risk.
In testimony before the Senate Banking committee, Mr. Volcker called for the end of the mortgage lending giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as hybrid public-private enterprises, saying instead that Washington should assist borrowers through “clearly designated government agencies.”
He also called for the registration of hedge and equity funds of any substantial size, as well as periodic reporting and disclosure from such firms.
For banks and other firms that are large enough to shake the entire financial system if they fail, he called for “particularly close regulation and supervision, meeting high and common international standards.”
While he did not offer details of how these more robust regulations would be enforced, he said that central banks, including the Federal Reserve, should accept “a continuing role in promoting and maintaining financial stability, not just in times of crisis, but in anticipating and dealing with points of vulnerability and risk.”
Mr. Volcker’s recommendations on Wednesday were drawn from a report released in mid-January by a subcommittee of the Group of 30, a nonprofit body of senior representatives from various governments and the private sector. The group’s members include Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner and Lawrence H. Summers, the director of the White House National Economic Council.
The hearing was called in order to consider wide-ranging reforms to the nation’s financial regulatory structure. Congress aims to develop recommendations within the coming months.
Among the ideas considered Wednesday was the creation of a super regulatory agency, perhaps within the Federal Reserve, which would be charged with coordinating responses among the diverse alphabet-soup of agencies overseeing financial companies. The agency could also be tasked with identifying systemic risks to the economy that might come from diverse quarters, like the links between the collapsing housing market and mortgage-backed securities that led to the current credit crisis.
“We must consider whether to empower a single agency to be the systemic risk regulator,” said Senator Christopher J. Dodd, the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, in his opening statement. “If that agency is the Federal Reserve, we must be mindful of ensuring the independence and integrity of the Fed’s monetary policy function.”
In an earlier hearing on Wednesday, Harry Markopolos, the money manager who had tried to warn regulators about Bernard L. Madoff’s alleged Ponzi scheme, called for such a super regulator, one that would include the S.E.C., an insurance regulator, the Federal Reserve and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
“The S.E.C. was never capable of catching Mr. Madoff,” Mr. Markopolos told a House Financial Services subcommittee.
House Financial Services Committee Chairman Barney Frank has said the first priority in overhauling financial regulation is to set up an entity to oversee systemic risks of the kind that wreaked havoc on Wall Street last year.
The idea of a systemic-risk regulator, proposed by the Bush administration last year, is gaining adherents in the Obama administration and in Congress. Mr. Dodd has mentioned the possibility of giving that role to the Federal Reserve.
Mr. Volcker did not offer a recommendation on whether the Federal Reserve should become the core agency whose job it would be to monitor and control systemic risks to the financial system, but he warned that lawmakers should consider carefully whether to give additional regulatory roles to the Federal Reserve.
“You will have a very different Federal Reserve if you have them doing all the regulation from a prudential standpoint, especially considering now that their main role is in the area of monetary policy,” he said in answer to a question.
Mr. Volcker also said, in answer to another question, that more government cash will be needed to address the credit market crisis that has dragged the economy into recession.
“It’s not going to be cheap,” Mr. Volcker told the committee. “It’s going to be lots more billions of dollars.”
