Winter Storm Aftermath
Some Relief for Commuters in Washington and Philadelphia
Commuters in Washington and Philadelphia will get some relief on Monday morning, but the morning commute will be far from business as usual. 
All regional rail service will remain suspended in the Philadelphia area, with the exception of trains to the airport, the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority said on Sunday. 
Here is the latest information on our service as we prepare for the Monday morning commute | https://t.co/xvMiiGIcNi
 — SEPTA (@SEPTA) January 25, 2016
Most trolleys in Philadelphia will be operating on or close to schedule, and many bus routes will be operating normally. 
Commuters in Washington will have access to limited underground train service between 7 a.m. and midnight on Monday, the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority said. A limited number of “lifeline” buses will also run.
Trains will only be arriving every 20 to 25 minutes on Monday, the transit agency said, but the good news is that commuters can ride them for free. No fares will be charged. 
Despite Everything, Domestic Bliss
On Saturday night we asked if people were in the throes of cabin fever, or domestic bliss. 
We’re happy to report more of you were happy, than desperate, as you hunkered down and obeyed the travel ban. 
@NYTMetro domestic bliss pic.twitter.com/vno1sRTe7k
 — Jackie (@JacksNoel) January 24, 2016
@NYTMetro @nytimes newlyweds in our 40s, stayed indoors, coffee & banana bread, scrabble, soup & grilled cheese, strengthened our marriage
 — Los D (@egoLOStistic) January 24, 2016
@NYTMetro @nytimes no cabin fever. Cards Against Humanity.
 — lori schmitt (@lschmitt62) January 24, 2016
Subways, Metro-North, and L.I.R.R. Return (Mostly) to Normal
Most commuters in Connecticut, Westchester County and Long Island can breathe a sigh of relief, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said on Sunday. Metro-North will be back to normal on Monday morning, as will service on most branches of the Long Island Rail Road. Aboveground subway service in New York City will also be back in operation. 
Metro-North will operate regular weekday service for Monday morning, January 25. More details at https://t.co/OBa4yu1izk .
 — Metro-North Railroad (@MetroNorth) January 25, 2016
Seven of the 12 lines on the L.I.R.R. will be fully operational by 5 a.m. on Monday, it said in a statement. Those seven branches are: Port Washington, Oyster Bay, Port Jefferson, Ronkonkoma, Huntington, Babylon and Greenport. Partial service will be restored to the Montauk branch as far as Speonk.
L.I.R.R. service to Atlantic Terminal in Brooklyn will remain suspended, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said, but commuters can use their train tickets on M.T.A. subways. 
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority said it needed more time to restore service to the Hempstead, West Hempstead, Far Rockaway and Long Beach branches, and suggested that commuters in those areas take bus and subway services provided by the M.T.A. 
Passengers on Metro-North should face smoother sailing. It will run its normal weekday schedule out of Grand Central Terminal on Monday morning, although some trains may be canceled or combined as workers continue to clear snow and ice from tracks, switches and yards throughout the system. 
Amtrak said all of its services between Boston and Virginia would run on a modified schedule on Monday as the region recovers from the blizzard. Representatives were in the process of contacting passengers who had reservations on affected trains to help them make new plans, it said on Sunday. 
Some Amtrak services between Washington and cities in the Southeast and Midwest will also be canceled, but Amtrak said it had not yet decided which ones. 
 7:22 pm ET Jan 24, 2016 2016-01-25T01:10:48+00:00 
 

Stranded Travelers at Kennedy Airport Are Left on Their Own

A student visiting from San Francisco has been stuck at JFK since Friday. Credit Kevin Hagen for The New York Times

Many airline passengers were left stranded and frustrated in the wake of the snowstorm by a wave of flight cancellations up and down the East Coast. At Kennedy Airport in New York City, many complained that they had been abandoned by their airlines, too. 
New York Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Saturday that the “vast majority” of flights at the city’s three airports were canceled on Sunday, and it was unclear when operations there would return to normal.
At Kennedy Airport’s Terminal Eight, Segun Oke was close to tears when he learned that his American Airlines flight had been canceled and he would have to wait until Tuesday to catch another.
“I have been here since Friday. I am stressed. I want to get out of here,” said Mr. Oke, a legally blind man who spent the night in the Jet Blue lounge.
“My flight was supposed to leave at 6 a.m. on Saturday morning,” Mr. Oke said. “I don’t see well. I can’t read well. It is terrible the way American Airlines is handling this. My flight was the first cancelled; why am I not on the first flight going out tomorrow?”
Mary Ambrose said she had been waiting for 50 minutes to check in for a 10:55 a.m. flight to Toronto. Holding up her cell phone, she complained that she had been on hold for 40 minutes waiting for answers. 
“The board is telling me the flight is on time, but no one is here to check me in,” she said. “I have eight minutes to get to my gate and I don’t have a ticket.”
A sense of eeriness hung over Terminal 8, where no flights took off on Sunday morning. The AirTrain was out of service and few cars sat in the parking lot. Passengers waiting for flights home to Miami, Paris, Barcelona, Buenos Aires and Los Angeles sat inside waiting for something to happen. Some stared into cell phones while others slept atop their luggage. 
Some travelers scoured the building looking for assistance, but security was sparse and there were no airline representatives in sight. When an American Airlines official appeared to make an announcement, people ran to him to hear the latest news. 
“American Airlines has canceled everything for today and all flights are cancelled along the East Coast,” he said. “I know you are getting frustrated. There will be limited flights tomorrow and those flights are solidly booked.”
He passed out cards bearing an airline number and advised passengers to start dialing, but warned it was unlikely that an operator would answer with any sort of promptness. When a stranded passenger asked about his flight to Miami, the official replied, “You are not going anywhere my friend.” 
“Someone should be here to help us,” said Bhagwan Dasani, who was trying to get home to Miami. “I have no idea what I am going to do. No flight today. No flight tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. Impossible.”
Robert Laurent, who was originally booked for a 5:40 p.m. flight to Paris, stood behind an American Airlines check-in desk, where an airline representative would normally sit. He felt abandoned, he said. 
“This is so frustrating that no one is here to help us,” said Mr. Laurent. “We came to New York for nine days for vacation. It was fun, except for today.” 
Mayor De Blasio’s Takeaway
I think this is the shape of things to come, which means we’re going to put even more warnings in place going forward; we’re going to tell people preemptively to get ready to shut their businesses and do other things in advance.”
Garbage Could Pile Up in Some Places
The aftermath of the snowstorm is going to stink for residents of some cities along the East Coast, where officials on Sunday canceled or modified trash-collection schedules.
Garbage trucks in Philadelphia have been converted for use in snow removal, and the city asked residents on routes that collect on Mondays to hold their trash until Feb. 1. Those residents were already overdue for trash pickup, after collection was canceled for Martin Luther King’s Birthday last Monday.
Officials in Washington canceled trash collection on Monday and Tuesday, and they were assessing whether it would be feasible later in the week. Mayor Muriel Bowser said during a news conference on Sunday the snow was impeding trucks’ ability to get into alleys between buildings.
In New York, where mounds of trash bags are put on the streets daily, officials canceled collection on Monday.
UPDATE: Garbage/recycling/organics collections suspended Mon 1/25. Please wait to put your items out. Items already out may remain.
 — New York City 311 (@nyc311) January 24, 2016
Many more municipalities were deciding how they would handle the trash over the coming week as they dug out from the historic snowstorm.
Residents in Huntington, N.Y., where 26 inches of snow fell, are among those who will not have to hold onto their trash. Frank Petrone, the town supervisor, said in a mass call to residents that garbage collection will resume Monday.
 5:55 pm ET Jan 24, 2016 2016-01-25T00:53:08+00:00 
 

In central Washington, where a total of about 25 inches of snow was reported, all (mostly unplowed) roads Sunday morning led to Dupont Circle, the unofficial arena for the capital’s biggest snowball fights each winter.
This year’s iteration, dubbed “Snow Wars: The Snowball Strikes Back” by organizers, had all the trappings of a blockbuster: local camera crews, costumes, a high energy soundtrack. A small crowd stood by out of the line of fire with cameras ready as two sides exchanged fire.
Photo: Alex Wong/Getty Images; Video: By REUTERS
“I’ve been here for five years and I’ve missed it every year,” said Andrew Vondall, who was covered in snow even as he took a break from lobbing artillery into the scrum. “I was not going to miss it this time.”
With public transportation closed for the day and streets largely impassable, Mr. Vondall, 30, said he had walked about 45 minutes from the city’s southwest quadrant to join in the action — without gloves, he proudly noted.
The “Star Wars” theme carried over to another snowball fight at Meridian Hill Park. The “Imperial March” could be heard as opposing groups faced off, and a participant dressed as Kylo Ren stood in front of the enemy line and attempted to use the force to deflect snowballs. 
He was unsuccessful. 
“Right in the noggin,” he said.
The Great Dupont Circle #Snowball Fight of #2016 #blizzard #snow #washingtondc #dc pic.twitter.com/ygyJilG4Cs
 — Robert Fine (@bobfine) January 24, 2016
 5:28 pm ET Jan 24, 2016 2016-01-24T23:24:56+00:00 
 

But according to Ms. Rudden, this weekend’s flooding was nothing special. Since Hurricane Sandy hit in 2012, the area has faced flooding like this frequently.
“This is an ongoing thing,” Ms. Rudden said. “This is our everyday life.”
Some flooding on the south shore. Photos from babylon and lindenhurst pic.twitter.com/JUA87f4Xd4
 — RichHoffmanWeather (@hoffmanrich) January 24, 2016
The storm left slush on Pacific Street — knee-high water levels, Ms. Rudden described — that cannot be plowed away. The waters were not receding because “giant icebergs” were stopping them, she said.
“Today, across the canal from me, I can look at one, two, three, four — at least five — houses across the canal got water in them,” she said. “And this is, like, ice-cold water.”
Lindenhurst is dotted with vacant and deteriorating houses, Ms. Rudden said.
“People don’t realize what it is still like down here,” she said.
A few weeks ago, Nanette Perso, another resident, said, Pacific Street experienced an equal level of flooding after a high tide.
“This is a continual problem,” Ms. Perso said.
This time, Ms. Perso expected that the house would flood. The water reached only the garage. When the water recedes, it’s time to clean and hope there is no mold, she said.
Sunday night’s high tide could bring up even more water. Ms. Rudden laughed as she said that a neighbor had left a BMW vehicle in the street rather than moving it for the storm. She expected the frozen and slushy water to be around for a week, she said.
“We’re going to be like this until it gets hot and melts a little, because it’s going to freeze tonight, and they can’t plow because it’s going to be frozen water,” Ms. Rudden said. “It’s like an ice skating rink.”
But Long Island in general “dodged a bullet,” the Suffolk County executive, Steve Bellone, said on Sunday morning.
“The wind shifted, and as the high tide was coming in, the wind was actually pushing against the water, pushing it back,” he said.
@News12LI @ELehpamer12 @Elizabethnews12 @News12CTPhotogs this is how you build a snow fort! Lindenhurst pic.twitter.com/3FpvLWfwaA
 — Joe C (@jchiarelli) January 24, 2016
In the face of a storm, Long Island’s properties and power grid are vulnerable. Many houses are along the beach, and many power lines run overhead. Flooding was such a concern for Suffolk County that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo called Mr. Bellone to check in on Saturday night, Mr. Bellone said.
“This was a tough storm for the grid,” Mr. Bellone said, praising energy company Public Service Enterprise Group, “and it held up.”
Unfortunately for Lindenhurst residents, Long Island Rail Road service remained suspended on Sunday. The M.T.A. was hoping to have it back running on Monday.
 5:26 pm ET Jan 24, 2016 2016-01-24T22:26:25+00:00 
 

Heavy Snow Deflates N.F.L. Team Facility in Virginia
Heavy snow and high winds deflated the Washington Redskins team’s indoor training facility in Loudoun County, Va., the team said in a statement.
Images circulated on social media show the white facility rendered nearly invisible under a layer of snow. A banner bearing the team’s name is barely visible in front.
The facility, known as the Bubble, “will be re-inflated when the snow is removed and conditions improve,” team officials said. There was no word on whether anyone was injured.
The team’s fans, whose playoff hopes ended when the team lost the wild card round to the Green Bay Packers on Jan. 10, quickly seized the opportunity for humor at the expense of the New England Patriots, who were accused last year of deflating their footballs to give an unfair edge to the team’s star quarterback, Tom Brady.
#BreakingNews @Redskins indoor practice field deflates faster than @Patriots footballs #Blizzard16 pic.twitter.com/0y3tIgIBpb
 — Brad Freitas (@NewsChopperBrad) January 24, 2016
@Redskins I blame Tom Brady
 — Dylan #JrNation (@WrkEmSilyGators) January 24, 2016
@Redskins @LHayes_13 you sure it wasn't the patriots ball boys
 — Jesse Rogers (@JRR1127) January 24, 2016
The Patriots play the Denver Broncos in the playoffs on Sunday afternoon at Mile High, in a match that will decide who goes to the Super Bowl.
No Longer Stranded in Pennsylvania
The last of the motorists who spent two nights stranded on the Pennsylvania Turnpike were finally freed on Sunday morning.
A 40-mile backup on the turnpike on Friday forced thousands of people in cars, buses and tractor-trailers to sleep on the highway. Hundreds of emergency responders and National Guard members worked from Friday to Sunday clearing snow and providing fuel, food and water to stranded people.
The back-up was finally cleared early Sunday, but the turnpike remained closed on Interstate 76 between New Stanton and Breezewood for several hours, according to traffic advisories from the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission. The entire turnpike, which runs across southern Pennsylvania from Ohio to the New Jersey border, was under a weather emergency, and drivers were advised to pack supplies.
Among those stranded were more than a dozen buses of Catholic high school and college students who were returning from the March for Life in Washington, an annual anti-abortion demonstration.
Sabrina Swidergal, 19, was on one of eight buses from the Franciscan University of Steubenville in Ohio. After 36 hours on the turnpike, her bus was freed around 7:30 a.m. and arrived on campus five hours later, she said.
Stepping off the bus in Ohio, she said, she felt like Rocky after he climbed the stairs in Philadelphia.
“We did it,” she said triumphantly. “We’re all OK. And we’re just relieved to be back on campus, off the bus and all okay.”
The Duquesne men’s basketball team also returned to campus late Saturday, a day after the team won a game at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va. Officials said on social media that the team arrived more than 30 hours after leaving Virginia.
Home sweet home. 30 hours, 24 minutes after departure. pic.twitter.com/VE59xGsudd
 — Duquesne Basketball (@DuqMBB) January 24, 2016
What should have been a five-hour ride to Pittsburgh turned into a 27-hour road trip for the Temple University women’s gymnastics team. The team was headed to a meet, but missed it after getting stuck on the turnpike. Once freed, they slept at a hotel in Somerset before returning to campus.
#TUG is on the move after more than 24 hours! *tears of joy pic.twitter.com/LGCGoBVL8e
 — TEMPLE GYMNASTICS (@TUWG) January 24, 2016
Storm Death Toll Rises to at Least 29
The Associated Press reported on Sunday that the number of storm-related deaths had risen to at least 29. 
In Washington, an 82-year-old man died after shoveling snow, authorities said on Sunday. 
A number of deaths were caused by carbon monoxide.
In South Carolina, an elderly couple was found dead after the deadly substance seeped into their home.
In Pennsylvania, the authorities said on Sunday that a man had died of carbon monoxide poisoning, apparently after his car was buried in snow by a passing plow. 
Earlier on Sunday, New Jersey reported its first storm-related deaths: a 23-year-old mother and her infant child who died after carbon monoxide seeped into a vehicle being shoveled out from under the snow in Passaic, N.J.
Other deaths resulted from car crashes, hypothermia and snow shoveling. 
 4:26 pm ET Jan 24, 2016 2016-01-24T21:26:28+00:00 
 

Limited Metro Transit Service to Resume in Washington Monday
RT @wmata: Restoration of limited underground Metrorail, "lifeline" Metrobus service for Monday, January 25: https://t.co/IrTsBAToMy #wmata
 — Metrorail Info (@Metrorailinfo) January 24, 2016
Metro announced the Metrorail system will open at 7 a.m. on Monday with limited underground service and trains initially running every 20 to 25 minutes, and will close at midnight. Metrobus service will operate Monday from 12 p.m. until 5 p.m. on service limited to 22 lines.
Fares will not be charged on Metrorail or Metrobus.
Baltimore’s Mayor Says She Can’t Give Timeline for Clearing Streets

People dug out of the snow in Baltimore on Sunday. Credit Juliet Linderman/Associated Press

Baltimore Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake said on Sunday that she could not predict when the city would be able to clear streets buried by the record snowstorm.
“When you have an historic storm, our response to that, our recovery from that is going to take time, so I’m asking for patience,” the mayor said at a news conference. “While we want to get to as many neighborhood streets as we can as quickly as we can, we know it is going to take time. This is a complicated snow-removal effort.” She said snow-removal crews were moving as fast as possible. 
“We’ve never had this amount of snow,” Ms. Rawlings-Blake said. “When I talk about patience, it’s also again common sense.” 
“If it took us however many days the last time to clean up,” she said, referring to a 2010 storm, “if it’s more snow, it should take us longer, right?
“So we’re going to be working as aggressively as possible,” she continued, “but it’s still 2 1/2 feet of snow, so people just have to be reasonable.”
Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland announced on Sunday that the state will seek disaster relief from the Federal Emergency Management Agency as the state copes with the record snowfall.
“Roads are still extremely treacherous,” said Mr. Hogan, a first-term Republican governor, at a news conference.
Mr. Hogan said the state has deployed 3,000 pieces of road-clearing equipment, had 365,000 tons on hand and has turned to assistance from 700 National Guard troops and 212 guard vehicles.
He said it was impossible to say when roads will be cleared.
 “Recovery efforts from this historic storm will be extensive, they will take time and patience,” the governor said.
