Just the Right Digital Camera for You
Sales of digital cameras already outpace those of film-based models, and many first-time buyers are moving on to their second purchases. For digital models, "we are approaching now the stage at which about 50 percent of cameras are being sold to households that already have one," says Philip Scott, manager of Kodak's consumer digital camera division.
With such popularity comes an abundance of choices. And buyers, especially first-time buyers, can find it difficult to sort out the offerings. "One lesson I learned is that usual camera wisdom is somewhat misleading," said Mark Grinbaum of South Brunswick, N.J., a technology director at an electronic options exchange, who bought his first digital camera in February. Mr. Grinbaum said that he initially focused on the megapixel ratings that describe a camera's resolution, or ability to show detail.
But he came to share the opinion of Siddiqi Ray, a professional photographer in Minneapolis, who discounts the importance of ever-higher resolution. She recommends five megapixels as suitable for most people. "Unless you're shooting for a billboard, you're fine," she said, noting that five megapixels is sufficient for prints of 16 by 20 inches.
Looking at the Lens
Instead of resolution, Ms. Ray suggests that buyers look more closely at the lens. She recently added to her collection a slim model, the $350 Cyber-shot DSC-T33 from Sony, because she is impressed with the Carl Zeiss lenses Sony uses.
Whatever the make, consumers can assess lenses by considering basic features. One is aperture, which regulates how much light comes in. Lower aperture numbers (such as 2.8 or 2.4) translate to larger openings that allow the camera to capture pictures in darker settings before requiring the harsh light of a flash. (A camera's image sensor and processor also determine low-light performance.)
Another important capability is the zoom range, generally expressed in "35-millimeter equivalent" measurements originally used for film cameras. Most zoom lenses start at a wide setting of about 38 to 35 millimeters. But some go even wider, down to about 28 millimeters.
At the other extreme is the lens's telephoto capability, used to make distant objects appear closer. Most models can zoom by at least a factor of three times, noted as "3X" in camera descriptions, for example from 35mm to a modest 105mm telephoto. The focal length considered "normal," what the unaided eye sees, is about 50mm.
Larger cameras can provide far greater zoom range, up to a factor of 12. High zoom capabilities are handy, for example, in capturing close-ups of players in sporting events -- be it the World Series or a Little League practice. (Many knowledgeable photographers say it is best to consider only the optical zoom factor, provided by the lens itself, not the digital zoom, an electronic enhancement that results in significant loss of resolution.)
Such action shots also require that the camera respond quickly -- focus, adjust for lighting and snap the picture before the moment is lost. This response time, known as shutter lag, is important for more than just sports photography.
Recalling one of his former digital cameras, Minh Do of Greenwich, Conn., said, "If you try to get pictures of kids, you get really blurry shots or you miss them completely." When shopping for a new model, Mr. Do, a partner in a hedge fund, began by asking friends what they did not like about their current cameras. Many cited shutter lag (sometimes more than one second) and the time required for the cameras to start up (from a split-second to almost five seconds). Vendors may state both shutter lag and start-up time for their cameras, but they may not all use the same criteria to measure it.
Buyers can verify technical claims by checking independent reviews in photo magazines or at sites like dcresource.com, dpreview.com, or steves-digicams.com. Reviewers also judge image quality for shots of various subject types under multiple lighting conditions and post sample images online. "I kind of rely on the review sites because they have the resources to test much better than I ever could," said Mr. Do, who recently bought a Canon PowerShot SD400 for $330.
Camera Types
In addition to price, digital cameras vary widely in styles, sizes and capabilities, so that different models will appeal to different types of users. "We certainly segment the cameras and design them based on the buyers," said Mr. Scott of Kodak. While no universal categories exist, most cameras fall into a few common product types: entry level, slim, high zoom, enthusiast and single-lens reflex.
ENTRYLEVEL -- Entry-level cameras hit relatively low prices (under $300 and often under $200) by compromising on considerations like resolution and slimness. For $200, the PowerShot A510 from Cannon, for example, has a 3.2-megapixel sensor and is about 1.5 inches thick. Its resolution is sufficient for sharing photos online or, according to Canon, for prints up to 5 by 7 inches. The L.C.D. panel -- for framing and reviewing shots and for changing settings -- measures a modest 1.8 inches diagonally.
SLIM -- One of Canon's slim cameras, the PowerShot SD400, sells for about $400 (and sometimes less, as in Mr. Do's case), has a five-megapixel resolution, and is less than half the overall size of the A510, although it provides a slightly larger, two-inch L.C.D. The EX-Z750 from Casio (about $450) is a bit larger than the Canon SD400 but makes up for that with a comparatively gargantuan 2.5-inch L.C.D. and a 7.2-megapixel resolution, which Casio conservatively says is capable of quality prints up to 13 by 19 inches.
Slim cameras may not be more sophisticated than entry-level models in capabilities.
The Canon SD400, for example, does not allow the manual control of shutter speed, aperture or focus that the cheaper A510 provides. But small cameras are meant to look more sophisticated. "The slim cameras are most definitely for a fashion-conscious or style-conscious crowd," Yolanda Hunt-Boes, a Sony spokeswoman, said of her company's offerings.
HIGHZOOM -- Slimness is not an option if you want high zoom capabilities. For example, Panasonic's DMC-FZ5 (about $400) provides 12X of optical zoom (36 to 432 millimeters, or almost nine times magnification from normal vision). And it is over three inches thick, with the lens retracted. In terms of features, these cameras range from point-and-shoot to rather sophisticated.
ENTHUSIAST -- So-called enthusiast cameras are also large. They appeal to photography buffs who want extensive manual controls and high resolution for large prints.
For example, the Cyber-shot DSC-V3 from Sony (about $600) has the same resolution as the Casio 7.2-megapixel EX-Z750, but it's about three times as big. That makes room for extra buttons and knobs. The DSC-V3 also has a hot shoe for attaching a more powerful and sophisticated external flash unit.
SINGLE-LENSREFLEX -- Large as an enthusiast camera may be, it is dwarfed by single-lens reflex (S.L.R.) cameras like the Canon Digital Rebel XT ($1,000 for the body and basic lens) or Nikon D50 ($900 with lens). All S.L.R.'s are professional-style cameras. Their signature feature is the ability to change lenses -- fitting anything from ultrawide to extreme telephoto to specialty types.
They also typically have higher sensitivity, measured in ISO units, for taking photos in dim lighting. For example, the Canon SD400 slim camera tops out at ISO 400, but the Rebel goes to ISO 1600. And shutter lag is virtually nonexistent. But S.L.R.'s may lack some features oriented toward more casualusers, like the ability to capture video.
Adding It Up
Though many cameras fit into neat categories, the people who buy them may not. The person who wants a big S.L.R. for art photography may want a slim camera for candid shots and video at a party. Some may find cameras that provide good compromises; others may do best with multiple models.
Mr. Grinbaum, for instance, bought two discounted cameras -- a KonicaMinolta Dimage Z10 with an 8X optical zoom for about $110 and a slim Kodak EasyShare Cx7330 for about $50. That strategy that proved cheaper than buying a single model with all the traits he wanted.
Ms. Ray, the photographer, compares her collection of cameras to a well-stocked wardrobe. "Accessorize, accessorize with your cameras," she said.
