Chopped Salad With Apples, Walnuts and Bitter Lettuces Recipe
Ingredients
For the dressing
 1 tablespoon sherry vinegar or champagne vinegar 
 1 teaspoon balsamic vinegar 
 1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice 
 1 small garlic clove, green shoot removed, puréed (optional) 
 2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 
 Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste 
 2 tablespoons walnut oil 
 5 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil 
For the salad
 4 to 5 cups chopped bitter lettuces such as radicchio, endive or escarole 
 2 crisp, tart, juicy apples, cut in small dice (1/4 inch) 
 ½ cup chopped walnuts 
 ½ cup crumbled blue cheese or feta 
 ¼ cup chopped fresh parsley or a mix of parsley, chives and tarragon 
 Nutritional Information
 
Nutritional analysis per serving (6 servings)
 286 calories; 25 grams fat; 4 grams saturated fat; 0 grams trans fat; 11 grams monounsaturated fat; 8 grams polyunsaturated fat; 12 grams carbohydrates; 2 grams dietary fiber; 7 grams sugars; 4 grams protein; 8 milligrams cholesterol; 320 milligrams sodium 
 Note: The information shown is Edamam’s estimate based on available ingredients and preparation. It should not be considered a substitute for a professional nutritionist’s advice. 
 Powered by Edamam 
Preparation
In a small bowl or measuring cup, whisk together vinegars, lemon juice, garlic, mustard, salt and pepper. Whisk in walnut oil and olive oil.
Combine all of the salad ingredients in a large bowl. Toss with dressing until well coated, and serve.
 Tip 
Advance preparation: The salad is best tossed and served right away, but it has good staying power and won’t suffer if it sits for an hour before serving. The dressing can be made a day ahead and refrigerated. Let it come to room temperature before dressing the salad.


 Like this recipe? 
Let's Get Started




Merci
You now have full access to The New Essentials of French Cooking. We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
