Review: Concertgebouw Orchestra Shows Off Its Legacy at Carnegie
Daniele Gatti conducted the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam in two concerts at Carnegie Hall. Credit Richard Termine for The New York Times

The Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra came from Amsterdam to Carnegie Hall this week to show off two things: its new music director and its impressive heritage.
Mahler conducted this eminent ensemble in the Dutch premiere of his First Symphony in 1903, and his works have remained central to the orchestra’s repertory, as have the symphonies of Bruckner. So it made sense that Daniele Gatti, now in his second season as music director, led Bruckner’s Ninth and Mahler’s First on these two programs.
What was missing was any sense of the new. It’s possible to perform a towering symphony associated with an orchestra’s legacy as well as offer a recent work. But on Wednesday, Mr. Gatti preceded the Bruckner with Wagner’s Prelude to Act III and “Good Friday Music” from “Parsifal.” And on Thursday, the brilliant Dutch violinist Janine Jansen, continuing her Perspectives series at Carnegie, was the soloist in Bruch’s Violin Concerto No. 1.

Janine Jansen, the Dutch violinist, played Bruch with the orchestra. Credit Richard Termine for The New York Times

That Mr. Gatti missed the opportunity to be adventurous during this visit was doubly frustrating since these programs were both relatively short. Each had about 80 minutes of music; each could have been performed without intermission. That might have especially benefited Wednesday’s program, since Bruckner’s Ninth is steeped in the Wagner of “Parsifal.”
Still, on their own terms both performances were rewarding. Mr. Gatti made the most of the Concertgebouw’s rich sound, especially its mellow, full-bodied string section, during a radiant, spacious account of the Wagner. (Mr. Gatti proved himself an insightful Wagnerian when he conducted “Parsifal” at the Metropolitan Opera in 2013, a staging that returns next month.)
Bruckner died in 1896 while composing the fourth and final movement of his Ninth Symphony. The three completed movements add up to a score of some 60 minutes. Mr. Gatti’s magnificent account of the sublime Adagio made a convincing case for it as a fitting end to this work: a composer’s farewell. The long first movement is an extreme example of Bruckner’s penchant for writing episodic, unconventional forms, in which a theme can seem less a statement than a strand of a later development section that has crept in too soon. Rather than imposing some sense of order on the movement, Mr. Gatti lavished expressive beauty and majestic restraint on the music.
Ms. Jansen chose Bruch’s concerto, a staple of the repertory, for this appearance with the pre-eminent orchestra of her homeland. Her performance was so probing and lucid, and so matched by the refined playing of the orchestra, that this popular piece sounded fresh and bracing. I’ll not soon forget the intimate way she shaped the poignant ruminations of the second movement’s wistful melody. She played a beautifully soft-spoken encore: Manuel De Falla’s setting of “Nana,” a Spanish folk song.
For those who prize flawless playing and clean entrances in Mahler, this performance of his First Symphony would have been a little frustrating. But Mr. Gatti and his players dug deep into this early work. The opening of the first movement hauntingly conveyed the primordial, cosmic elements of the music. The second movement came off like a real, foot-clomping country dance. The finale built inexorably to a brassy, jubilant final flourish, some bloopers notwithstanding.
Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra
Janine Jansen continues her Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall on Sunday with a recital with the pianist Jean-Yves Thibaudet; 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org.
A version of this review appears in print on January 20, 2018, on Page C2 of the New York edition with the headline: Legacy Performances Both Short and Sweet.
