Chief Cleric Says Iran Doesn’t Seek Nuclear Arms
TEHRAN — Iran’s supreme religious leader vowed Tuesday that his country would pursue a peaceful atomic energy program and had no interest in nuclear weapons, calling them expensive and useless.
The remarks by the leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, did not represent any change in Iran’s official position, but were unusual because he said them publicly, just a few days before the major world powers were expected to offer Iran new incentives to suspend its uranium enrichment program.
Ayatollah Khamenei’s remarks seemed clearly aimed at those powers, including the United States, that contend that Iran covets nuclear weapons and may secretly be trying to develop the technology to build them. Mr. Khamenei called those accusations false, saying they were meant to deprive Iran of its legitimate right to nuclear power.
“The Iranian nation is not seeking nuclear weapons,” the ayatollah said at an event commemorating the 19th anniversary of the death of the founder of the 1979 Islamic Revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
Advertisement
“We are seeking nuclear energy for peaceful purposes for daily use, and we will continue this path to the envy of our enemies,” he said.
The ayatollah spoke a day after the State Department said it expected Javier Solana, the European Union’s foreign policy chief, to travel to Iran in mid-June to offer a package of new inducements if it abandoned uranium enrichment, which can be used to produce both electric power and nuclear weapons.
Iran has consistently rejected demands that it stop enriching uranium, despite economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations Security Council.
Ayatollah Khamenei’s speech also appeared to be a response to comments by the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Mohamed ElBaradei, who said Monday in an unusually tough speech that Iran was holding back information needed to clarify intelligence reports that it had researched nuclear bombs in secret. The agency is the United Nations’ nuclear monitor.
In what appeared to be a warning, the ayatollah said that terrorists could one day acquire nuclear bombs, leading to insecurity around the world.
A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Chief Cleric Says Iran Doesn’t Seek Nuclear Arms. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
