Economy in First Quarter Was Worse Than Everybody Thought
The Upshot

A Vitamix factory in Strongsville, Ohio. Bad weather and a surprise slump in health spending hit the economy in the first quarter. Credit Mark Duncan/Associated Press

The beginning of the year was not just bad for the United States economy; it was — on paper at least — the worst quarter since the last recession ended five years ago.
The Commerce Department revised its estimates of first-quarter gross domestic product to show that overall economic activity contracted at a 2.9 percent annual rate, much bleaker than the previous estimate of a 1 percent decline. A combination of shrinking business inventories, terrible winter weather in much of the country and a surprise contraction in health care spending drove the first-quarter fall, which was the worst since the first quarter of 2009, when the economy shrank at a 5.4 percent rate.
What makes the sharply negative number all the more stunning is that it did not feel like an economic contraction at all in the first quarter. Employers kept adding jobs at a reasonably healthy pace. Many measures of business activity and consumer confidence were stable.
Moreover, forecasters are expecting a healthy pop of growth in the second quarter, which ends next week. That was underscored by a separate data release Wednesday showing orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft — a proxy for investment by businesses apart from the most volatile sector — rose a healthy 0.7 percent. That was enough for consulting firm Macroeconomic Advisers to increase its forecast for second quarter growth to 3.5 percent, from 3.3 percent.
The saving grace of the weak report is that G.D.P., while the broadest measure of economic activity, is also among the most backward-looking. After all, the period covered by this report ended nearly three months ago. More contemporaneous measures of the economy have looked healthier, particularly job creation. Markets were hardly fazed by the negative report, with the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index up half a percent Wednesday.
Still, though 2014 is only around halfway over, the brutal math of G.D.P. means that the nation now looks consigned to another year of sluggish growth at best — and that’s true even if there is a pickup over the remainder of the year. For example, if the economy were to grow at a 4 percent pace each of the three final quarters of 2014 — a level only attained twice in the last five years, and never in consecutive quarters — the overall growth rate for 2014 would still work out to only a tepid 2.2 percent.
“The economy now must attempt to dig itself out from an even larger hole than previously expected,” Lindsey M. Piegza, chief economist of Sterne Agee, said in a research note.

A construction project at the Seaport District in Boston. Revised estimates show that the United States economy had its worst quarter since the last recession ended five years ago. Credit Paul Marotta/Getty Images

The sharp contraction was driven by an unlikely combination of negative forces that conspired to turn what had once seemed set to be another quarter of so-so growth into a considerably gloomier experience. Economists had expected the revised number to show a 1.8 percent annual rate of contraction, and were caught off-guard by the far more negative result. The key thing they missed: consumer spending, the mainstay of economic activity, was far weaker than either government numbers or private analysts had previously thought, particularly spending on health care.
Previous G.D.P. numbers, released in late May, showed that health care spending contributed 1 percentage point to economic growth. The new report now finds that health care spending actually subtracted 0.16 of a percentage point from the growth rate. The health care spending data in G.D.P. are a measure of how much President Obama’s sweeping health law is reshaping health care spending patterns, and it is now showing opposite results from those reported two months ago, when the first-quarter data was initially released.
On one hand, the health reform effort aims to increase the number of Americans with health care coverage, which would tend to increase reported spending. On the other hand, it also aims to reduce costs, which could depress the sector’s contribution to economic growth (even if desirable over the longer-term).
Analysts expect the contribution of health care to the overall G.D.P. to be bumpy and unpredictable in the quarters ahead because of uncertainty about the law.
“Looking forward, the volatility in the measurement of health care services represents a risk to our G.D.P. forecasts,” Doug Handler, chief United States economist at IHS Global Insight, wrote in a note. “Since this volatility is not business-cycle related, its impact should be heavily discounted in assessing the general health of the economy.”
Other causes of the first-quarter contraction were already well known. Businesses pulled back on their inventories, which subtracted 1.7 percentage points from growth (an earlier estimate had been a loss of 1.6 percentage points). The good news is that the negative inventory swing, if underlying demand stays solid, may encourage companies to rebuild their stocks of goods in the future.
And the rough winter weather did not help many categories of business activity. It slowed home-building activity (residential investment subtracted 0.13 of a percentage point) and commercial building work (which subtracted 0.22 of a percentage point).
But the fact that the economy as a whole could show such a sharply negative result thanks to a few idiosyncratic factors is also a reflection of the underlying weakness in the economy.
When growth is strong, even some bad weather and an unexpected inventory swing do not cause a contraction in the economy, or at least not a contraction on the scale reported for the first quarter of 2014. But because the pattern of growth has been roughly in the 2 percent range or a bit below for years now, the economy is more vulnerable to shocks that leave activity in negative territory.
The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
A version of this article appears in print on June 26, 2014, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: G.D.P. Began Year 2.9% in the Hole.
