In Armand Baltazar’s ‘Timeless,’ People, Dinosaurs and Robots Co-Exist
From “Timeless.”

TIMELESS: DIEGO AND THE RANGERS OF THE VASTLANTIC 
Written and illustrated by Armand Baltazar 
607 pp. Katherine Tegen/HarperCollins. $19.99. 
(Middle grade; ages 8 to 12)
This new generation is weird. Usually, despite all our handwringing about epochal changes, kids are kids. But a recent study by Jean Twenge suggests young people today have become so enamored with smartphones that they are voluntarily delaying time-honored rites of passage like getting drivers’ licenses and having sex. How is a writer supposed to reach kids so attached to their screens?
One answer is to make books as vivid as the screens they’re watching.
That is what Armand Baltazar has done in “Timeless: Diego and the Rangers of the Vastlantic.” Like a midsummer action movie, the scope (and budget) of the book is dazzling. Six hundred glossy pages, with hundreds of luscious color illustrations by Baltazar, depict a world after a cosmic event that has reshuffled epochs. People from every era coexist with dinosaurs and giant robots.

Photo

Diego Ribera is turning 13 as the book opens. His father, Santiago, is the Thomas Edison of his age, responsible for reinventing much of the world in the aftermath of the “Time Collision.” When Santiago is captured by the Aeternum, a group of radicals who want to reverse the Time Collision, Diego and three friends stow away with pirates to rescue him.
Kids will swoon over Baltazar’s illustrations of World War II fighters strafing robots as pteranodons swoop by. Unfortunately, his brilliance in painting gorgeous cityscapes and charming nonhumans (robot-spider-cranes! herds of murderous aquatic dinosaurs!) does not extend to his characters, who are photorealistic to the point of being frozen. But there is real dynamism in the passages of graphic storytelling, when illustrations alone advance the plot. This formal blending, pioneered in children’s books by Brian Selznick, is used only occasionally here, often during a climactic action scene. Kids will enjoy the challenge and variety of this mental gear shifting.
The world of “Timeless” is rich with diversity and its challenges, both new and familiar: Diego is called “clock-mongrel” by a Time-Separatist gang because his parents come from different epochs; two black characters, one from the 19th century and one from the 21st, discuss the wounds of racism. Baltazar effectively explores biases old and new, albeit not perfectly: there are moments when his depictions of certain characters, particularly Paige, the black member of the group, lapse into unintended but unfortunate stereotypes. Nonetheless, “Timeless” shows us a way forward. There’s a moment of giddy disequilibrium as we realize that the world’s most celebrated inventor is a tattooed 40-something named Santiago. We begin to believe in this future.
While the action will enthrall, and the struggle for a better world will inspire, the reader will ultimately be won over by the intimate moments in “Timeless.” Diego is an impulsive, imperfect kid, struggling to be a good friend and a good son. This is Baltazar’s debut, and there are plot points that feel forced and occasional clunky dialogue. But as the novel unfolds, he finds his stride and manages to write and paint a thrilling adventure with a relatable protagonist.
Like any good blockbuster, “Timeless” promises a sequel, and children will clamor for it. Even as applications for drivers’ licenses drop, children’s book sales are on the rise. Why? Phones may promise, in the palm of a child’s hand and in the privacy of their bedrooms, intimacy with others and themselves. But by now kids know that promise is belied by online bullying, hacking and public shaming. They want a window into the human heart. That’s what books were invented for.
Adam Gidwitz’s most recent novel is the Newbery Honor-winning “The Inquisitor’s Tale: Or, The Three Magical Children and Their Holy Dog.”

A version of this review appears in print on December 17, 2017, on Page BR15 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Time Passages.
