Supreme Intelligence
Tourists walk around the Taj Mahal as workers clean the monument in Agra, India. Credit Manish Swarup/Associated Press..

SUNDAY PUZZLE — Yes, hi there, just a note to remind everyone that this is a cool puzzle in and of itself. No matter where you come from, or how you feel about things in the world today, Joel Fagliano’s crossword theme is a really funny play on words, which is what we come here to enjoy.
And that’s exactly how I’m going to talk about it. I hope you will, too.
Today’s Theme
Mr. Fagliano cuts one column off his puzzle today in order to show off his “Supreme Intelligence.” By doing so, he is able to stretch his revealer, OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE across the grid.
That’s funny because Mr. Fagliano has also managed to pack six former and current Supreme Court justices in his puzzle, but their names are obstructed by black squares. That had to be incredibly hard to do and still fill the puzzle well.
For example, we have ANTONIN SCALIA stretching across 1-, 8- and 11-Across, and ABE FORTAS, EARL WARREN, ELENA KAGAN, SONIA SOTOMAYOR and STEPHEN BREYER appear as well. I’m sad that Mr. Fagliano was not able to fit my own favorite Supreme, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, in the puzzle, but that would have been tough.
Advertisement
Tricky Clues
18A: O.K., so we know that “Worked on some screenwriting?” doesn’t have anything to do with writing for film because of that question mark at the end of the clue. What other kind of screens do you “write” on? How about that computer in front of you? The answer is EMAILED.
71A: There are apparently a lot of words that can describe someone who abuses alcohol. I’m used to seeing SOT in the puzzle, but I hadn’t head of the clue “Stewbum” before.
79A: Homonym alert! Did you think this was an “Indication to bow slowly” from the waist? Not today. Today, we are bowing a string instrument, and the answer is the musical direction LENTO. Tricky one.
115A: The answer to “Dum-dums” is STUPIDS, which I was sure I had heard of before. It hasn’t been in The New York Times Crossword since 1958, but there was a series of books which became a British-Canadian series which became an American film called “The Stupids,” about a family who is … well, I’ll let you find out:
The Stupids Trailer 1996 Video by Video Detective
119A: A brooding sort might seem like one of those dark and mysterious heartthrobs, but today we’re just laying eggs. The answer is HEN.
7D: I like these clues where they seem like an ordinary exclamation, but the answer is a synonym. “Now there’s a thought!” is a terrific clue for IDEA.
16D: If you are “Closest to base” in a ballgame, you’re safe. But if you are “Closest to base?” with a question mark, you need to be thinking about a whole other kind of base. We have a few to choose from, but today we’re looking for the base that means evilest.
Your thoughts?
