Notes From a Crazy Campaign Trail
In The New York Times Book Review, Jill Abramson reviews Katy Tur’s “Unbelievable: My Front-Row Seat to the Craziest Campaign in American History.” Abramson writes:


Donald Trump picked Katy Tur, a young NBC News correspondent, as his favorite target in the “fake news” media. Why this curious choice for repeated taunting? First, and probably most important, she was a she. She was short, and we know Trump hates anything small. She was a campaign trail novice. Easy pickings for intimidation, Trump must have figured. . . .
“Unbelievable,” Tur’s short and breezy campaign memoir, is the story of how she soldiered on. It is also the familiar tale of how a relatively inexperienced woman is looked down on and underestimated, both by the candidate she covered and by her network superiors. By the end of “Unbelievable” it’s clear how wrong they all were in thinking they could run over “Little Katy” (Trump’s snide name for Tur).
On this week’s podcast, Abramson discusses “Unbelievable”; Alexandra Alter has news from the publishing world; and Gregory Cowles, Jennifer Szalai and John Williams on what people are reading. Pamela Paul is the host.
Here are the books mentioned in this week’s “What We’re Reading”:
“Simple Justice” by Richard Kluger
“Aftermath” by Rachel Cusk
“A Perfect Spy” by John le Carré
 You can send them to books@nytimes.com.
How do I listen? Two ways
From a desktop or laptop , you can listen by pressing play on the button above.

1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon.
2. Search for the series. 
3. Subscribe.  You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives.
4. Or just sample.  If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.
On your Android phone or tablet:
1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon.
2. Search for the series.  You might have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results.
3. Subscribe. 
4. Or just sample.  If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.
Get the Book Review Newsletter
Be the first to see reviews, news and features in The New York Times Book Review.
