‘The Art of Sleeping Alone,’ Sophie Fontanel’s Memoir
In Nicholson Baker’s recent novel, “House of Holes,” there’s a hotel in which every room has a Sex Now button. Press it, and an aroused person (male or female) will arrive, ardent to attend to your needs.
In the blinkered male imagination, women possess their own kind of Sex Now button. This is to say: when women want sex, they can often have it, because men are slaves to impulse. Men are opportunists and frequently moral idiots.
The French writer Sophie Fontanel’s new memoir, “The Art of Sleeping Alone,” is about not merely employing your Sex Now button selectively, but about throwing it away altogether. For 12 years, starting at 27, she turned her body into a carnal no-fly zone.
The results, she reports, were instantaneous and long-lasting. “I’d begun to glow,” she declares. “My backbone was much straighter.” Friends gazed at her and “asked me if I was in love.” It was like yoga, without the sore arches.
Ms. Fontanel is an editor at French Elle, and her book was a best seller in her native country, where it was published under the title “L’envie” (“The Desire”). It’s an empowerment manifesto in an era of grabby daddy-o’s like Dominique Strauss-Kahn. It was, and is, a searching investigation into the power of no.
The first thing to say about “The Art of Sleeping Alone” is that it’s very French. It’s slim, chic and humorless, that is, a sophisticated bagatelle of a volume, filled with detours to exotic locales: the Sahara, Goa in India, the Greek island of Hydra.
It’s also gauzy and episodic and not particularly well written, yet it drifts along on a kind of existential bearnaise of its own secreting. It’s “Bonjour Tristesse” grown bruised, older, warier.

Credit Sonny Figueroa/The New York Times

There’s little in the way of biography in the “The Art of Sleeping Alone.” We learn almost nothing about Ms. Fontanel’s family, schooling or job. Among the things that propels you forward is the mystery of when, exactly, sex began to seem like a terrible deal for her, like one of life’s mistakes instead of one of its gifts.
With the exception of a blurry vignette about an older man and a hotel room when she was 13 — was this a sexual assault? — no attempt is made to explain the origins of her emotional feedback. Each detail is free-floating.
Sex is rarely a meeting of equals in “The Art of Sleeping Alone.” It is a platform for male dominion. “I’d had it with being taken and rattled around,” Ms. Fontanel says. “I’d had it with handing myself over. I’d said yes too much.”
Sexual experiences leave her feeling sullied. “He gloried in putting me through my paces,” she writes about a boyfriend. “It fed his pride.” Elsewhere, sex is equated with theft. “They weren’t,” she says, “going to get me.”
These evocations, in this adept translation by Linda Coverdale, are a reminder of one of the most perceptive things Alain de Botton had to say in “How to Think More About Sex,” his tidy self-help volume from last year.
“Sex will never be simple or nice in the ways we might like it to be,” he observed. “It is not fundamentally democratic or kind; it is bound up with cruelty, transgression and the desire for subjugation and humiliation. It refuses to sit neatly on top of love, as it should.”
There’s some joy to be had in Ms. Fontanel’s freedom from living up to her partnered friends’ expectations. When one of them stares at her flat-heeled boots, as if they weren’t sexy enough, as if she weren’t trying, she thinks to herself: “What good would it have done me to inform Carlos that Coco Chanel had worn the same ones, that they came from Church’s English Shoes (founded in 1873) in Paris, that they were bespoke (a restyling of a men’s model), and that I’d waited nine months for them?”

Sophie Fontanel Credit Emmanuele Scorelletti

She exults in her freedom. “Not one of them could stand my singleness,” she deposes about her friends, “because it could have been theirs.”
The opposite of experience is innocence, of course, and in “The Art of Sleeping Alone,” the author often longs to retreat from the adult world into one that can resemble childhood. She wants her life to be “soft and fluffy.” She wishes to be “the girl I’d been years before.”
At night, she hugs her clean pillows as if they were stuffed animals. When she sees a kind father with his children, she thinks, “Who had adored me like that since my parents?”
She takes long lavender milk baths, baths that are no longer just about the “Silkwood”-style scrubbing of the smell of men from her body. “I felt as if some divinity were rejoicing in me,” she writes. “Until then, water had been only a useful element, like the showers, for example, into which I rushed to cleanse myself of a presence after having let myself get caught.”
I was willing to cheer aspects of Ms. Fontanel’s victory over her own perceived weakness, but I wish her triumph didn’t arrive at the cost of what feels like emotional and intellectual retreat.
There’s a puzzling scene near the end of “The Art of Sleeping Alone,” in which Ms. Fontanel throws away all or most of her books, volumes by Elsa Morante, Gabriel García Márquez, Albert Camus, Jim Harrison and Virginia Woolf, among others.
“Their contents served no purpose,” she says. “All they did was tell stories.” She refers to them as “the fortune I hadn’t known how to make use of.”
Fiction, like sex, is messy. It’s complicating. Achieving softness and fluffiness doesn’t seem like much of a substitute.
THE ART OF SLEEPING ALONE
Why One French Woman Suddenly Gave Up Sex
By Sophie Fontanel
Translated by Linda Coverdale
153 pages. Scribner. $22.
A version of this review appears in print on August 16, 2013, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: Not Tonight, or Any Other Night.
