Huffington and Lerer Proved a Winning Team
Michael Loccisano/Getty Images
Ms. Huffington said that when the site began to branch out into more areas, she knew that it could succeed on a large scale. 
 That’s where Kenneth Lerer, its lesser known partner, came into play. 
 The friendship between Ms. Huffington and Mr. Lerer, a former AOL executive, almost did not happen. He said his first impulse was to say no when his friend Tom Freston, then the head of Viacom, suggested the two meet for dinner back in 2003. Mr. Lerer saw in Ms. Huffington everything he was not: an outsize public figure. 
 “I didn’t think I was going to like her,” Mr. Lerer recalled in an interview on Monday. “She’s a big personality. I didn’t know her. I wouldn’t say I’m a shy guy, but I stick to myself.” 
 But meet they did, at an Italian restaurant on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. His perception of Ms. Huffington, whom he knew only from her days as a Republican pundit in the 1990s, quickly changed. “I said ‘She’s terrific.’ You know how you just hit it off with people instantly?” 
 The unlikely pair grew to know each other better over the next year and hatched an idea: a liberal version of the Drudge Report, where people disaffected with the Bush administration could gather. 
 “He knew how primary this technology was going to be,” Ms. Huffington said, “and was a consistent advocate for making sure that we were getting our work and our site out there in front of people.” 
 Few, including Mr. Lerer, ever thought it could be a legitimate business. Blogging, after all, was done by loners in their basement. 
 “A lot of people I know tapped me on the head and said: ‘This is cute. What a nice cute idea,’ ” Mr. Lerer recalled. “So for the first year or two we didn’t get a lot of phone calls saying, ‘Wow!’ We got a lot of phone calls saying, ‘What the hell are you doing?’ ” He added, “I didn’t think it was going to be profitable.” 
 Ms. Huffington, who wrote a best seller titled “On Becoming Fearless,” had no such doubts. 
 “I decided early on that the Internet, that new technology, was going to provide a new way of connecting people,” she said, “and although I had no idea how big it would get, but I knew we were doing something that would work because the old media ways were not meeting people’s needs.” 
 On Monday, they surprised the skeptics, announcing that they had reached a deal to sell The Huffington Post to AOL for $315 million. 
 The Huffington Post turned out not to be just a single thing. Like so many successful Web enterprises it was a combination of features that together became a killer app. There was low-cost content, some of it from prominent contributors, combined with an unapologetically liberal bent; there was a relatively sophisticated system of aggregating content from other news sources; there was a way to build a community of comment around it. 
 And the site was always at the forefront of search optimization — headlining content in irresistible ways and often linking to salacious or marginal content in hot pursuit of traffic. (Much of the early traction in breaking through the clutter and getting noticed came from Jonah Peretti, who left early on to work at BuzzFeed. Mr. Peretti brought a sophisticated understanding of search, of how to find precisely what people were looking for at any given moment.) 
 The Huffington Post soon blossomed into a tribe with a roster of mostly unpaid bloggers that grew from 500 to 9,000 over the course of five years, all creating a site that manufactured much of its own content and liberally borrowed much of the rest. As the site matured, Ms. Huffington pushed resources into more original content and bigger names, but The Huffington Post has above all been a triumph of packaging and sensibility. 
 The same thing that made Ms. Huffington a little daunting in person — relentlessness, endless networking and promoting — were remarkably adaptive to Web endeavors. Her professional marriage to Mr. Lerer was a case of East Coast meets West. Mr. Lerer, the consummate East Coast executive working in the background, ends up in common cause with a creature of Los Angeles, whose career as liberal and conservative activist, political spouse and candidate left her with a fully weaponized list of connections. Ms. Huffington’s access to celebrities and willingness to press them into service as bloggers — Walter Cronkite was among the first bloggers, as was Ellen DeGeneres — served the site well. 
 Nora Ephron became one of the marquee bloggers whom Ms. Huffington persuaded to write for the fledgling Web site as a way to draw in readers. Ms. Ephron said she agreed to take the job because of Ms. Huffington’s relentless pursuit. “The thing she does, which is if you say anything to Arianna, it does not matter what, and it doesn’t matter if you find yourself within three feet of her and any words come out of your mouth, she will suggest that you turn it into a blog. That’s what she does,” Ms. Ephron said. Ms. Ephron first met Ms. Huffington as Ms. Ephron was casting her 1998 film, “You’ve Got Mail” — which ironically at the time was AOL’s catchphrase. 
1
