‘Outlander’ Season 2, Episode 4: A Man in the Dark
Andrew Gower as Prince Charles Stuart in “Outlander.” Credit Starz

Season 2, Episode 4: ‘La Dame Blanche’
What is the ultimate purpose of vengeance? To sate a hunger? To right a wrong? After it’s all done, does revenge feel worth it?
After three episodes that have introduced new players and their various alliances, this week’s hour is overloaded with plot twists. It’s almost too much. But what links it all are various acts of revenge.
While the antagonists of the first season had depth and a variety of interesting motives, the French are outright clichés. La Comte St. Germain might as well grow a mustache to twirl. Claire getting his shipment thrown out after discovering crew members with smallpox in the Season 2 premiere obviously angers St. Germain but the lengths he goes to for revenge are quite ridiculous. Without knowing more about him it’s hard to understand why he has become focused on her. When Claire drinks poisoned wine, St. Germain relishes watching her in pain. But it likely isn’t the only act of revenge he’s behind.
The episode’s title comes from its most harrowing scene. After leaving the charity hospital, Claire, Murtagh, and Mary are attacked by several men. But these aren’t common criminals. Their clothes betray their upper-class status. There is a cruelty in this attack that elevates St. Germain’s villainy to another level. (If he is indeed behind it.) When Claire’s face is revealed as they try to sexually assault her one of the masked assailants calls her La Dame Blanche and they run off in fear. But not before Mary’s life is irrevocably changed.
The way “Outlander” handles sexual assault often muddles its more feminist leanings. Yes, rape happens and deserves to be handled with care in fiction. But the brutality of Mary’s attack is tough to witness, and the camera doesn’t shy away from it.
The centerpiece of “La Dame Blanche” is the dinner party that Jamie orchestrates in the hopes of getting the Duke of Sandringham to relinquish his support of Prince Charles. Claire insists they still go through with it despite the attack. The surprise presence of St. Germain derails matters even if no one else can see the tension bubbling underneath his conversations with Claire.
This dinner party allows the writers a chance to give some new characters a bit of depth and to play around with the idea of warfare masked by social propriety. It would have been wise to let the episode have some room to breathe here. But there is far too much going on. On one side of the table Claire is keeping up appearances even while she sits next to St. Germain. On another is Louise, who is pregnant by Prince Charles and somehow able to convince her husband that the child is his. Then there’s Prince Charles and the Duke of Sandringham, who are disagreeing over Catholicism. On top of that Jamie uses his knowledge of Louise’s pregnancy to force Prince Charles into embarrassing himself. In addition, Mary runs downstairs after she confuses Alex for her attacker, and when he tries to calm her the guests mistake what is happening as rape. It takes a deft hand to balance all this. The episode ends with the dinner devolving into a messy fight.
St. Germain’s first attempt on Claire’s life has one positive side effect: It forces her to tell Jamie that Black Jack Randall is still alive. I’ve wondered several times how news of Randall’s survival would affect Jamie, figuring it would be yet another reason for him to grow more distant. The writers go in a completely different direction. Jamie isn’t angry or depressed by the news. Instead it gives him renewed purpose, a chance at revenge and “something to look forward to.” That Claire takes his happiness at face value is troubling. Does she believe revenge will heal Jamie or is she just so relieved to see his spirits up that she doesn’t want to question things?
What makes Jamie’s reaction even more disconcerting is how the news lets him experience lust again — first with another woman, which Claire learns when he tries to initiate sex with her and she finds two bite marks on his upper thighs. There is so much plot development in this episode that many of the storylines don’t get the focus they deserve. That Jamie experiencing sexual desire unencumbered by memories of Randall and with an anonymous woman in a brothel happens offscreen completely undercuts the drama. He doesn’t sleep with this woman, mind you. But this event puts much of their relationship in a different light.
This doesn’t mean Jamie isn’t still burdened with physical and emotional wounds. For the first time, he bares his soul to Claire, expressing that the abuse left him feeling “naked, alone trying to hide under a blade of grass.” His innermost self is ravaged. This vulnerability leads them to have sex for the first time in months. It’s tender, cathartic even, one of the best moments in the episode. But I was unable to really enjoy it because the story kept moving.
In its second season, “Outlander” is struggling to adapt the dense second novel in Diana Gabaldon’s series. There is incredible visual beauty and there is nuance in the performances of the main actors. But they can’t distract from how the poor pacing and structure is undoing even the strongest developments.
Other Gossip
• “Outlander” has never shied away from its more mystical leanings but they are far more apparent thanks to Master Raymond. The bone throwing divination he does for Claire cleverly foreshadows that she will see Frank again (as the Season 2 premiere detailed). While this cements his future it also isn’t the answer she’s looking for.
• In French mythology dame blanches are female spirits with supernatural abilities. It’s clear from the reaction of the assailants that Claire’s reputation is more aligned with her being a witch of great power.
• Claire’s dress at the dinner party is another gorgeous creation from costume designer Terry Dresbach. It’s also important to note that Claire’s costuming becomes simpler and unadorned as the episode goes on, perhaps highlighting her coming back into her own and the positive changes in her relationship with Jamie.
