Review: ‘The Great War,’ When America Took the World Stage
American troops preparing to sail home from Russia after World War I. Credit via the Library of Congress

Speaking just over a century ago about national defense — at a time when he was still fervently engaged in keeping the United States out of World War I — Woodrow Wilson intoned, “While America contains every element of fine force and accomplishment, America does not constitute the major part of the world.”
It was a simple fact in 1916, and remains so, but it’s hard to imagine a politician — much less a president — stating it so baldly today. The “American Experience” documentary “The Great War,” a three-night, six-hour production beginning Monday on PBS, paints a detailed and entertaining picture of the years when America began to think of itself as the major part of the world.
The documentary is pegged to the centennial of the United States’ entry into World War I, but it feels as if it could be responding to current events, with alliances born out of the Great War being called into question and American politics warped by the desire to turn back the clock.

A war poster from 1917. Credit via the Library of Congress

Directed by Stephen Ives, Amanda Pollak and Rob Rapley, with Mark Samels as executive producer, “The Great War” is a deluxe version of the standard talking heads and archival photographs documentary, full of arresting images and startling snippets of obscure history.
(How many of us know about the Black Tom Island incident in 1916, when a huge explosion at an ammunition dump in New York Harbor, blamed on German agents, blew out most of the windows in Lower Manhattan and was felt in Philadelphia?)
Also standard is the film’s practice of telling its larger story through a succession of individual portraits: Wilson, of course, but also lesser-known figures like the journalist Richard Harding Davis, the splendidly courageous suffragist Alice Paul and the Harlem bandleader turned soldier James Reese Europe.

A women’s peace parade down Fifth Avenue in New York in August 1914. Credit via the Library of Congress

Despite its overly broad title, “The Great War” is not a history of World War I per se. The major events of the war are sketched in, with appropriately grisly images, but the focus is on America and on the shifting attitudes and political and moral considerations that finally drew it into the conflict.
The picture of the country 100 years ago is often unwholesome in ways that, again, resonate with current turmoil. Prejudice against immigrants ran high. Anti-German feelings were virulent, and Wilson issued orders requiring the registration of all German-born residents (a program administered by the 22-year-old J. Edgar Hoover).
Americans were encouraged to spy on and report one another for violations of voluntary rationing programs or failure to buy war bonds. The government engaged in a sophisticated large-scale propaganda campaign enforcing loyalty. A poster shown in the film asks, in menacing capital letters, “Are You 100% American?”
Watching “The Great War” can give you a sense of a full circle of events. If this was how America became the world’s pre-eminent power, is this also how it surrenders the role?
The American Experience: The Great War
Starting Monday on PBS
A version of this review appears in print on April 10, 2017, on Page C6 of the New York edition with the headline: When America Threw In Its Lot With the World.
