Opinion | Iowa’s G.O.P. Statehouse Shows the Locals Who’s Boss
Iowans packed a public hearing last week in the State Capitol on proposed changes to the collective bargaining law. Credit Kelsey Kremer/The Des Moines Register, via Associated Press

Wielding their power to take a cudgel to local laws, Iowa’s Republican-controlled Statehouse is moving to make workers in four counties take a pay cut. Legislators plan to roll back minimum-wage laws that local governments passed to help their working-poor constituents.
Not content with that, the Republican measure would also restrict local governments’ power to set labor regulations and civil rights protections, and would even block communities from banning plastic bags at grocery stores to protect the local environment.
Workers in four counties that have enacted wage minimums scaled toward $10 an hour would face a pay cut back to the $7.25 state minimum in the name of what legislative leaders term a “seamless business climate.” Seamlessly impoverishing, if you flip burgers for a living?
The regressive measure is being offered by a majority party that regularly waxes poetic on the campaign trail about the wisdom of local government. But now that Republicans have taken control of both legislative houses, home rule is becoming a casualty of the sort of political triumphalism that President Trump is brandishing in Washington.
Reining in civil rights initiatives was in reaction to local measures protecting renters with federal housing vouchers from landlord abuse, critics said. Proponents insisted it was the localities that usurped state authority. But the local initiatives were taken only after the state government had ignored these problems.
Advertisement
The new Legislature has already had a tooth-and-claw fight that ended last week with Republican approval of sweeping cutbacks in the collective bargaining rights of government employees. Under the measure, which Gov. Terry Branstad is expected to sign, public-sector negotiations would be limited to wage questions. Unions would be barred from negotiating over health insurance, workers’ evaluations and staff reductions.
The union measure was offered as a lightning surprise as the Republicans last month took control of both houses and the governorship for the first time since 1998.
The separate moves to crimp local government were approved by a House committee last week and will be the subject of a public hearing this legislative session. Democrats got nowhere with a proposal to increase the state pay minimum to $11 by 2019. Governor Branstad said that while he supported the limits on home rule, he would like to see the state minimum wage raised so Iowa can stay competitive with neighboring states.
With Republicans now wielding total statehouse control in 25 states, Iowa may be providing an early look at a national wave of politics to pre-empt local government action they don’t like.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).
A version of this editorial appears in print on February 21, 2017, on Page A22 of the New York edition with the headline: G.O.P. Statehouse Shows the Locals Who’s Boss. Today's Paper|Subscribe
