Nonfiction Chronicle
GIRLBOMB: A Halfway Homeless Memoir. By Janice Erlbaum. (Villard, $21.95.) As Erlbaum learns, problems don't go away -- even when you do. A furniture-breaking, leering stepfather drove 15-year-old Erlbaum out of her home and into a Hell's Kitchen shelter. There, she writes, she was called "white bitch" and singled out for more abuse. One occupant, Sherri, heavily pregnant and furious ("When the nuns weren't looking, she'd take a flying leap at the arm of the sofa or smash her belly into the stair banister"), charged her with a small knife. Erlbaum, now a columnist for Bust magazine, describes the failures of a system designed to help young people: shelter residents were one missed curfew away from being thrown on the streets -- where, she discovered, you might end up, as one girl did, "hanging around the men's bathroom at the Port Authority with some pit-faced guy in zebra-striped weight lifter's pants." At a group home on the Upper West Side, she was threatened with "Treatment," which sometimes involved wearing a sign (for example, one that said baby) around your neck. School "functioned mostly as a clearinghouse for drumming up drugs, sex or shelter." At one point she worried, needlessly, that people thought she was "a Goody Two-Shoes." "Not at all," a friend assured her. "Maybe, like, a Slutty Two-Shoes." Erlbaum was hard to help. And everywhere she went, adults failed her: counselors seemed psychotic; teachers were indifferent; her mom floundered. How satisfying to watch Erlbaum survive adolescence and produce a smart, engaging book -- "A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Pothead," you might say -- that indicts those who wronged her yet never dissolves into tears or tantrums. Eventually, she did what many adults never manage: she grew up.
THE GREATEST TRAITOR. The Life of Sir Roger Mortimer, Ruler of England: 1327-1330. By Ian Mortimer. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $25.95.) Sir Roger Mortimer gave books of "romances" as a gift, wooed Queen Isabella and admired King Arthur. But Ian Mortimer (no relation), a fellow of the Royal Historical Society, favors battles -- the bloodier the better -- executions and political violence over chivalry and romance in his biography of the man who deposed King Edward II in 1326. It's a wise choice -- especially since, after all these centuries, it's hard to know much about Sir Roger's interior life. Instead, we learn he was "one of the most experienced soldiers of his age, with a particular penchant for the joust," whose "power of command and . . . sword" gave him an advantage over the king and his adviser, Hugh Despenser, who "could only order other people to fight." Despenser was eventually dispensed with: his penis and testicles were "sliced off" and thrown into a fire at the foot of the gallows; then he was gutted. Afterward, Sir Roger oversaw the coronation of a puppet-king, Edward III (a child who couldn't bear the weight of a crown -- two bishops held it above his head), and became de facto ruler of England for nearly four years. Grisly encounters were evidently more important than tender ones in "the Age of Treason," as Sir Roger's England was known -- for those who died as well as for historians. It was long believed, for example, that Edward II was killed "with a red-hot spit thrust through a horn inserted into his anus." Yet through some terrific detective work, the author discovers that "the red-hot poker story" was most likely created by those who saw Edward II as a martyr and was then, Wikipedia-like, copied and pasted into history books. Through this, Ian Mortimer writes, we see that "the most detailed chronicles are not necessarily the best informed." A lesson for historians -- and careful readers, too.
RUBBLE: Unearthing the History of Demolition. By Jeff Byles. (Harmony, $24.) In his "cultural history of destruction," Byles traces the evolution, in scattershot fashion, of implosions, demolition and wrecking balls. Sexual imagery runs amok (one building is "stripped to its naked concrete frame"; another contains sculptures that the author describes as "luscious, 12-foot-tall maidens"). Even a company newsletter sounds pornographic: The Velvet Crowbar. "Housewrecking" entails other issues, too. We hear about the 1966 tear-down of the old Pennsylvania Station in New York, a magnificent building through which "one entered the city like a god," Byles writes, quoting the architectural historian Vincent Scully, until it was obliterated, making way for a place where "one scuttles in now like a rat." It's easy to see how Byles, who has written for The Village Voice, became interested in the subject. He was a writer in residence for an artists' program at the World Trade Center in September 2001 and watched the buildings collapse, taking one of his studio mates with them. Yet his understanding of this tragic event never goes far beyond the Elizabeth Wurtzel level. (In case you missed it, Wurtzel said about the World Trade Center: "It just slid, like a turtleneck going over someone's head. It was just beautiful.") He makes fun of a CNN anchor who says, "Every time there's an implosion of a building we'll bring it to you, yes, we will, because it's neat." Unfortunately, though, that about sums up "Rubble."
ROME, INC.: The Rise and Fall of the First Multinational Corporation. By Stanley Bing. (Atlas/Norton, $23.95.) Bing, a corporate executive, a columnist at Fortune magazine and the author of "Sun Tzu Was a Sissy," lays out a case for why ancient Rome was like a corporation. He lists the secrets of "toga boys," including a tendency to engage in battles ("Oh so many wars!") as a way of keeping the citizens busy; an ability to maintain power among different classes, "with each having its own muscle and will to use it"; and "a vision of what the organization is all about." In short, "Rome, Inc." follows in the tradition of self-help/business books that are characterized by flimsy data, padded writing and terminally cute titles. Yet, in various ways, "Rome, Inc." stands out. With Hun-like aplomb, Bing ridicules everyone he can get his hands on -- Dennis Kozlowski, cowboys, Romulus, per diem consultants, Chaldeans, Roman Catholics. A parody -- yet, remarkably, none of the one-liners elicit so much as a chuckle. But it's the rape-as-a-weapon-of-war jokes that raise the question of whether anyone, except perhaps the author, read the manuscript before it was published. There are other mysteries. Why, for example, are we privy to unfunny, rather icky fantasies that include a castle with "prepubescent lovelies of all races and sexes frolicking between the legs of all those depraved old geezers"? The big question is why anyone would read this book. The afterword is entitled "What Have We Learned?" Well, I learned that some corporate executives think whatever they write is interesting or, even more of a stretch, amusing to others.
NEVER DRANK THE KOOL-AID: Essays. By Touré. (Picador, paper, $15.) In a collection of essays and profiles that focus on music as well as sports and politics, Touré provides a hip-hop history lesson. In an interview, Ahmir Thompson of the Roots tells him, "Hip-hop is created thanks to the conditions that crack set: easy money but a lot of work, the violence involved, the stories it produced -- crack helped birth hip-hop." And these pieces take us inside a world known for misogyny, shootings and lawsuits, describing a "kiddie-size dark navy bulletproof vest" tailor-made for 50 Cent's son and the efforts of Marion (Suge) Knight, co-founder of Death Row Records, to squelch questions about a lawsuit ("he dug his fingers into my shoulder muscle and half dragged me across the room"). Yet Touré, a contributing editor at Rolling Stone, is best at showing not swagger, but childlike hurt. Hip-hop's theme song could be Jay-Z's ballad "Momma Loves Me" ("Momma love me / Pop left me"), and sometimes even Momma doesn't. We learn about the fallout for people like DMX, pegged "a problem kid" in first grade and "shipped upstate." Decades later, DMX laments, "Wasn't no bad . . . kid, man." Touré presents a moving portrait of a generation that viewed events, even catastrophic ones, through the prism of pop culture: remnants of the Rwanda genocide, "yards full of bones and skulls," Lauryn Hill says after a visit, "seemed like props"; a father's death in a racecar crash, viewed through a rearview mirror, "looked like a movie scene," Dale Earnhardt Jr. says. When asked about his father, Dale Earnhardt Sr., he "stops to search for the words," saying, finally, "Hero material all the way." Clichéd, perhaps. But totally heartbreaking.
Tara McKelvey is a senior editor at The American Prospect.
