Roasted Brussels Sprouts and Mushrooms With Gremolata and Quinoa Recipe
Ingredients
 1 pound Brussels sprouts, trimmed and cut in half if small, quartered if large 
 1 pound mushrooms or oyster mushrooms, halved if small, quartered if large 
 Salt and freshly ground pepper 
 3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil 
 1 to 2 garlic cloves, finely minced 
 ¼ cup finely minced flat-leaf parsley 
 2 teaspoons finely chopped lemon zest 
 2 to 3 cups cooked quinoa (to taste) 
 Crumbled feta or goat cheese for serving (optional) 
 Nutritional Information
 
Nutritional analysis per serving (4 servings)
 320 calories; 13 grams fat; 1 gram saturated fat; 8 grams monounsaturated fat; 2 grams polyunsaturated fat; 43 grams carbohydrates; 10 grams dietary fiber; 4 grams sugars; 12 grams protein; 836 milligrams sodium 
 Note: The information shown is Edamam’s estimate based on available ingredients and preparation. It should not be considered a substitute for a professional nutritionist’s advice. 
 Powered by Edamam 
Preparation
Preheat oven to 425 degrees. Line 2 baking sheets or baking dishes with parchment or foil and brush with olive oil. Place the Brussels sprouts on one and mushrooms on the other and toss each with salt and pepper to taste and 1 1/2 tablespoons olive oil. Roast together in the oven, or 1 sheet at a time, for 20 minutes, stirring halfway through. The Brussels sprouts should be browned on the edges and tender. The mushrooms should be soft and there should be juice on the baking sheet.
Meanwhile, in a small bowl, mix together garlic, parsley and lemon zest (this is the gremolata).
Tip mushrooms, with the juice in the baking dish, into a large bowl. Add Brussels sprouts and gremolata and toss together. Spoon quinoa onto plates or into wide bowls, top with the Brussels sprouts and mushrooms, spoon on any juice remaining in the bowl, top with crumbled feta or goat cheese if desired and serve.
 Tip 
Advance preparation: You can roast vegetables a few hours ahead and reheat in a pan on top of the stove, or in a medium oven.


 Like this recipe? 
Let's Get Started




Merci
You now have full access to The New Essentials of French Cooking. We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
