Video Review: Hyundai’s Plug-In Sonata Saves Fuel With Understatement
THE 2016 Hyundai Sonata Plug-in Hybrid should be an easy sell. At road speed, it’s hushed. It keeps sharp bumps from reaching your keister, is spacious for the car pool gang and conservatively handsome. And of course, it’s very fuel-efficient.
In fact, some owners may seldom fill the car with gasoline. Charge it for around nine hours on 120-volt current, or just under three hours with 240, and the Sonata should cruise for 27 miles without any dead-dinosaur fuel whatsoever. When gasoline prices were soaring, this sedan would have seemed like salvation.
Nowadays? When gas is cheap? This car might have to pull over to make way for the consumer rush back to S.U.V.s, pickups and big crossover vehicles.
The Sonata plug-in’s only real competition is the Ford Fusion Energi, which travels close to 19 miles solely on electricity before defaulting to standard gas/electric hybrid operation. Hyundai beats that range by eight miles. True, the Chevy Volt gets 50 miles from its battery pack, but it’s a much smaller car. And for those who hadn’t noticed, Honda dropped the Accord plug-in.
The two share a 2-liter gasoline engine, but the electric drive motor built into the transmission is more powerful in the plug-in. The 50-kilowatt motor takes the place of a torque converter. This clever piece of engineering contributes to 202 total horsepower.
But the lithium-ion-polymer battery takes a hefty chunk out of the Hyundai’s trunk space. And the rear seats don’t fold down.
Drivers familiar with electric vehicles will notice a curious dynamic with Sonata. Even in pure electric mode, it feels like a very quiet gas-drinking car, because it uses a 6-speed gearbox. Fully electric cars tend to employ a fixed single ratio, and most hybrids have continuously variable transmissions.
When the battery is out of juice, the car seamlessly switches to gas/electric hybrid operation, a dynamic Toyota’s Prius always runs in.
The Environmental Protection Agency rates the plug-in at 99 miles per gallon over all and 40 m.p.g. in hybrid mode — a figure that is easy to achieve. Concentrating on the unique gauge cluster and center-screen graphics might have improved my results. The standard Sonata hybrid is slightly more efficient than the plug-in when it’s using both power sources.
Dashing from rest to 60 miles per hour in a little more than eight seconds, it’s quick enough. And Hyundai has given its cars more road feel recently, although the steering wheel won’t talk to your fingertips like, say, a Cadillac ATS-V’s.
Plot a destination in the navigation system, and the Sonata alerts drivers when to coast if the car is traveling faster than 40 m.p.h. and the next stretch of road will allow. Hyundai claims this feature raises fuel efficiency by about 3 percent.
Unlike the new Prius plug-in, this new Sonata doesn’t look like a science experiment. That understatement continues inside, where the cabin is pretty much the same for a hybrid or gas-only version. A large touch-screen interface is blissfully straightforward. Gas models added Android Auto and Apple CarPlay in June, and those features are to be available later this summer for the hybrid and plug-in hybrid models.
The top-end Limited model tested gets adaptive cruise control, heated and vented leather chairs, and a heated wheel. It retails for $39,435, before any government credits and incentives.
Sadly, a sunroof of any kind is not available. Two adults have loads of space in the back seat, and three will be fine as long as the 600-mile total range of the car isn’t being tested.
Not only does Hyundai’s 10-year, 100,000-mile warranty apply, the battery pack is covered for the life of the car.
While numbers and efficiency aren’t exciting, the Sonata plug-in satisfies through refinement, spaciousness and gas-sipping with little sacrifice. Because really, how long can this cheap gas thing continue?
  Correction: July 7, 2016  
 
An article on the Automobiles page on Friday, about the 2016 Hyundai Sonata Plug-in Hybrid, misstated the availability of Android Auto and Apple CarPlay in Sonatas. While those features were made available in June for gas models, they are not yet available in hybrid or plug-in Hyundai Sonatas.
A version of this article appears in print on July 1, 2016, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: An Understated Fuel-Sipper.
