State Senator Makes a Fashion Statement
Wendy Davis’s filibuster wear. Credit Eric Gay

Beyond doubt, Ms. Davis, a runner, chose the shoes not to make a fashion statement but for some degree of support during a long period in which she was not permitted to sit or lean or use a restroom. And yet the shoes, by the Japanese company Mizuno, have taken on a life of their own, for some people becoming a symbol for choice. In California and in other states, legislators, are wearing pink shoes in solidarity with Ms. Davis.
“Wendy Davis is a trendsetter, like Carrie of ‘Sex and the City’ making Manolos a household name,” said Lucy Danziger, the editor of Self magazine. “This time, it’s Mizuno, and this time the shoe is for comfort, not sexiness.”
The exact style, the Wave Rider 16 running shoe, $115, became an instant best-seller on Amazon.com, reaching the No. 1 spot for women’s shoes for a brief period on Friday. Traffic on the Mizuno Web site more than doubled as a result of customers searching for the Wave Rider 16.
The attention came as a surprise to Mizuno, which sought to remain politically neutral in its response. “We love seeing our running shoes on all consumers, regardless of their political affiliation or beliefs,” said Harper Cornell, a public relations manager for its United States offices, though there was at least a trace of satisfaction from all the attention the shoes received.
“We were seen as the underdog in the industry,” Ms. Cornell said.
Beyond her arguments on the senate floor, Ms. Davis made a case for athletic shoes in the workplace. Ms. Danziger noted that most technical sneakers are now as fashionable as street flats, adding that she has been wearing cute and colorful styles to the office this summer. The Mizuno design, she said, “also screams ‘I am here to get a job done.’ ”
To Ms. Danziger’s point, hardly anyone commented on the rest of Ms. Davis’s outfit (including a dress identified by Fashionista as Erdem). In politics, that may be one small step for womankind.
A version of this article appears in print on 07/04/2013, on page E4 of the NewYork edition with the headline: Stepping Up.
What's Next
Loading...
