What to Cook Tonight
Scrambled eggs. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times

Good morning. On Wednesdays, most of the time, we don’t cook with recipes but instead with narrative, looking for a story in the refrigerator to avoid a trip to the market after work. You should do the same. Wednesdays are hard enough. Tonight, breakfast for dinner, and the only good use of a nonstick pan: cheesy eggs, with buttered toast, and jelly glasses of chilled red wine.
You’ll maybe recall my colleague and pal Julia Moskin’s instructions in the matter of cooking scrambled eggs, “the most satisfaction in the least amount of time” (above). So if you’re game, make the toast as you like, then slide it into a low oven to keep warm. Scramble two eggs per person in a bowl with a splash of milk and a pinch of salt, and tip them into a hot pan foaming with butter. Stir and stir, quite heartily. Add a big handful of shredded cheese per person to the pan right at the start, and watch as it melts even as large curds form in the eggs, the whole pan turning into little pillows, glossy and soft. Anoint these with minced chives and you’re good to go, dinner in an instant. You’ll be in bed reading “Bleak House” before 9. (If that’s your thing. You could also stay up late scrolling through Instagram, then watch the Knicks play the Warriors.)
Eggs aren’t for everyone, of course. If you have a little more time on your hands today, Florence Fabricant’s recipe for pot roast may answer a little more happily this evening, especially if you serve them alongside buttered egg noodles. Or, if you’d like a recipe that falls in between fast and slow, you could make Julia’s recipe for coconut curry chicken noodle soup, or the chef Amanda Cohen’s recipe for charred cauliflower stew. It calls for broiling some of the cauliflower and pickling the rest, which is a combination that results in big, big flavor. “Excellent,” one Cooking user wrote. “I am not a vegetarian, but this stew got me closer.”
Have you made Nigella Lawson’s recipe for baked cod with prosciutto, which she serves over lentils with garlic and thyme? You can omit the legumes in the name of midweek haste, and serve it on a bed of arugula instead.
Or you could knock down Mark Bittman’s recipe for creamy pasta with chicken and mushrooms, which deploys the cool trick of treating the pasta as if it were risotto, which requires a lot of stirring but rewards the stirrer with a one-pot meal.
Come visit us at NYT Cooking for more ideas for what to cook tonight. Browse away, and save the recipes you like to your recipe box. Send yourself a grocery list. Then cook, and rate (five stars for that creamy pasta, no doubt!) and leave notes on those recipes you’ve improved or altered or substituted ingredients for — we all benefit from the collective experience of our growing number of cooks. And, if something goes upside down, either with a recipe or our site or apps, do sing out for help. Smart cats reside at cookingcare@nytimes.com. They’ll get back to you.
Now, in case you missed it, and a very long way from soups and stews, I urge you to read Kit Seelye and Todd Heisler’s heartbreaking accounting in The Times of one family’s awful, continuing experience with the ravages of opioid addiction in New England, “1 Son, 4 Overdoses, 6 Hours.”
Alexandra Schwartz’s “Photo Booth” column in The New Yorker this week turned us on to Natalie Krick’s book, “Natural Deceptions,” photographs of Krick’s mother in the ultra-sexualized poses of advertising spreads. As Schwartz writes, deceptively simply, “they are wild.”
And, sticking with photographs, do take a look at this excerpt from Richard W. Brown’s “The Last of the Hill Farms: Echoes of Vermont’s Past,” in Modern Farmer. The images are amazing, a glimpse of the early 20th century past in the present of the 1970s. See you on Friday!
