Video Review: Kia Cadenza Offers Budget-Minded Pampering
We make deliberate choices when buying things. Shopping for a wallet recently, I briefly considered a devastatingly gorgeous Burberry billfold. However, the outlay would have left me with little money to put into it. Oh, the irony. I opted for something similar but far more affordable.
It’s the same with cars. A deluxe sedan can be had without a premium badge affixed. Toyota does it with the Avalon. There are also the Hyundai Azera, Nissan Maxima and Chevy Impala.
The near-luxury entry from Kia, the South Korean automaker, is the Cadenza (which spell check desperately wants to change to credenza). The 2017 model is the second generation to be sold in the United States. Simply put, this elevated machine pampers owners with Coach quality at Wilsons Leather prices.
Does the Cadenza indulge at the level of a BMW 5 Series or Mercedes E-Class? No. There is more than just social ranking with those loftier prices.
But the Kia looks rich. And Swedish. From the front three-quarters view, it’s a kissing cousin to Volvo’s new S90 sedan. Demerits, though, for that square chunk of a sensor on the grille.
Base models with standard rearview camera and leather seating start at $32,890. My Limited tester at $45,290 is stuffed with details expected from upscale rides. Its trendy quilted Napa leather is supple, and the front seats it is draped over are climate controlled. A suede headliner looks to be swiped from a car twice the price. Panoramic roof glass treats all passengers.
There is no shortage of safety tech, either. Auto braking with pedestrian detection, adaptive cruise control, lane-keep assist and blind-spot warning are all along for the ride. So is a surround-view camera system that to the driver makes it seem there is a drone hovering above the car.
Shoveling content into an upscale car is easy enough. But integrating it well is a black art that Kia engineers pull off. The touch-screen interface is fall-on-your-face easy and incorporates Android Auto and Apple CarPlay. A head-up display helps to keep eyes on the road.
How does the Cadenza go? Acceleration is brisk, nailing 0 to 60 runs in just under 7 seconds. But the revised V6, refined as it is, doesn’t match the velvety operation found under high-zoot hoods. At 3.3-liters, the engine produces 290 horsepower and 253 pound-feet of torque.
The transmission has eight speeds and shift paddles on the steering wheel. Drive modes alter shift dynamics, steering weight and throttle response, but not suspension firmness. (Remember those extra Franklins in your wallet or purse before grousing.)
The new Cadenza’s lighter chassis structure manages to improve torsional rigidity by 35 percent. The suspension employs aluminum steering knuckles, and Amplitude Selective Damping shock absorbers help quell body bob and dive.
Kia finally dialed in some road feel through the steering wheel, an attribute historically lacking. The button-down ride quality is comfortable, controlled and quiet without oozing driving character. Go with the Nissan Maxima for a taste of that.
Uncle Sam rates Cadenza’s fuel economy at 20 city and 28 highway on standard grade fuel. That is competitive in its class.
Kia claims that the Cadenza’s interior is the most spacious among the direct competition, and there is no question the back seat is nearly limolike.
Bun warmers back there? Yep. There are sunshades for the side and rear glass, too. Power jacks in the rear can charge phones and computers, but there’s no rear climate zone. Seat backs don’t fold to expand the trunk (though there is a slot for skis). Fortunately, the trunk is spacious.
Not only does the Cadenza slug it out with the cars mentioned earlier, it holds its own against near-luxury offerings like Buick’s new LaCrosse, the Lincoln MKZ and Lexus ES.
In addition to style, features and value, Kia offers a 10 year/100,000 mile powertrain warranty. The Cadenza may not impress brand snobs, but the price leaves buyers a good amount of leftover cash to stuff into their wallets. Feel free to make it a fancy one.
A version of this article appears in print on November 18, 2016, on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Plenty of Pampering for the Budget-Minded.
