Review: Dopo La Spiaggia’s Chef Brings Lighter Fare to Sag Harbor
Dopo La Spiaggia, formerly Tutto Il Giorno, still has its chef, Maurizio Marfoglia. The restaurant was formerly jointly owned with Gabby Karan de Felice. Credit Lindsay Morris for The New York Times

It must have been quite a surprise for some residents of Sag Harbor this summer when they wandered over to their beloved Bay Street restaurant, Tutto Il Giorno, only to discover it was now called Dopo La Spiaggia (“After the beach”). Was it possible that the immensely popular Tutto had fallen victim to the Hamptons restaurant scene’s revolving-door epidemic?
The answer, many will be relieved to find out, is, not really. Two of the original owners, Gabby Karan de Felice and Maurizio Marfoglia, have decided to part ways, with Ms. Karan de Felice taking over the Southampton and Manhattan Tutto locations, and the rights to the restaurant’s name. Mr. Marfoglia remains in Sag Harbor at the newly born Dopo La Spiaggia.
The changes to the restaurant’s décor are subtle. The space is the same chic cottage with a charming outside patio that offers views of nearby Sag Harbor Marina. New art and chandeliers have been hung.

The squid-ink tagliolini. Credit Lindsay Morris for The New York Times

More significant is the menu’s new focus. “Lighter, simpler, with more local ingredients,” Mr. Marfoglia said by phone after our two visits. He is also the executive chef, and by our estimation, his Northern Italian menu’s greatest strengths lie in the appetizers and pasta selections.
There is an impressive spicy tuna tartare appetizer, for example, which combined some very fresh fish with cucumbers and avocado, and which came off as cool, light, and delicious. A scallop crudo, meanwhile, was nothing short of fabulous, the diver scallops sliced paper thin and topped with sea salt, American sturgeon caviar and a drizzle of olive oil. You may never want to cook a scallop again after tasting this melt-in-your-mouth raw version.
A burrata with organic tomatoes and basil was, in its own way, almost as good. Mr. Marfoglia won’t say where he buys his burrata, which is spectacularly moist and creamy. “I don’t want anyone else to know,” he said. “They’re already complaining we buy too much from them!” And a frito misto of calamari and shrimp leaned heavily on the calamari, but was very light and crispy with not a drop of residual oil to be found. It was also served with fried squash and a chunky marinara sauce.
Pastas are uniformly excellent. Our favorite was the homemade ravioli, which was filled with a duxelle of local shiitake mushrooms and served with a restrained coating of a sage-butter sauce. The squid-ink tagliolini, also made from scratch, came chock-full of seafood, including bay scallops, shrimp and calamari, all of which was tossed with chili flakes and tomato.

Poached branzino served in a white wine sauce with spinach and tomatoes. Credit Lindsay Morris for The New York Times

After so many outstanding dishes, you may find yourself slightly let down by Dopo’s entrees, which tend to be more solid than spectacular. The best of the bunch might be the poached branzino, served in a white wine sauce with spinach and tomatoes. The fish was fork-tender and the portion plentiful — even diners with the heartiest of appetites might want to take home one of the four fillet-sized pieces. And a seafood stew had a very nice spicy tomato broth and was satisfying despite a disproportionate allocation of seafood. A single large shrimp and some bites of a sea bass, for example, were overrun by a cockles convention — I stopped counting these little clams at 30.
Mr. Marfoglia’s heart doesn’t really seem to be in the meat dishes the way it was with some of the others. A sliced rib-eye was grilled and served with some arugula, shaved pecorino cheese and a salsa verde. It was perfectly O.K., if not wholly inspired. A veal chop Milanese tried for something more interesting: Instead of a cutlet, a whole veal chop was used, pounded out thin, breaded and pan fried and still attached to the bone. The accompanying chicory salad was under-dressed, however, and the dish ended up seeming bland.
Things picked up again with dessert, which included a stellar tiramisù and a generous berry tart with crème Anglaise. Both were large enough to share.
In our phone conversation, Mr. Marfoglia stressed how his staff is much the same as it was in previous years, and in fact the service is notably professional. Indeed, Dopo La Spiaggia seems to have kept the best elements of its predecessor, while moving — however incrementally — in a new direction. “There are customers who don’t notice the new sign,” Mr. Marfoglia said. “I think some of them don’t even realize we’ve changed the name.”
Dopo La Spiaggia
6 Bay Street
Sag Harbor
631-725-7009
dopolaspiaggia.com
Very Good 
The Space Chic cottage has seats for 40, with 25 more outside on the charming patio where there is a retractable awning. Chairs and tables are tightly spaced inside and out.
The Crowd Well-heeled summer residents with a European contingent. No children on the nights we were there. Service is notably professional.
The Bar Small, six-seat lacquered wood bar with street views. Fifteen wines by the glass, $15 to $22; 52 in bottles, $40 to $420. House cocktails, $15 each. Beers by the bottle only, $7.
The Bill Dinner appetizers, $18 to $25; pastas, $25 to $29; entrees, $33 to $46. Lunch appetizers, $17 to $22; pastas, $23 to $27; entrees, $25 to $39. Desserts, $12 to $14.
What We Liked Scallop crudo; tuna tartare; frito misto; shiitake ravioli; squid ink tagliolini; branzino; prime rib-eye; tiramisù; berry tart.
If You Go Sundays through Thursdays, noon to 10:30 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays, until 11:30 p.m. No reservations accepted. Parking along Bay Street and adjacent side streets can be tricky at times. 
Ratings Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair, Poor
A version of this article appears in print on August 7, 2016, on Page LI9 of the New York edition with the headline: With a Change in Leadership, a Lighter Menu.
