A New Type of Cat, Ready to Rumble
Review: 2014 Jaguar F-Type S: A high-end audio system that's fun to drive? Jaguar's 2014 F-Type snarls like the Rolling Stones and tracks as precisely as a needle in a groove. Tom Voelk recommends a good set of headphones.
 Firesand Orange is what Jaguar calls the paint that flashed from the F-Type sports car that I recently drove. The crowd-pleasing shade recalled such things as a pumpkin, a traffic cone and a hunter’s vest. 

 What it didn’t remind people of was a Jaguar, with several New Yorkers professing love for the car but surprise at its British nameplate. Their reaction was understandable: the 2014 F-Type is Jaguar’s first pure two-seat sports car in 40 years. 
 Also, like every new Jaguar, the F-Type looks and sounds nothing like the genteel coaches that have come to characterize the brand, especially after it moved away from racing and sports cars like the E-Type, the F-Type’s classic predecessor of 1961-74. 
 But if the people on the street couldn’t always identify the badge at first glance, it didn’t stop bystanders from drooling and draping themselves over the Jag, sometimes literally: I cringed when I found a group of teenagers engaged in a curbside photo shoot, taking turns posing atop the front fender for maximum Flickr effect. 
 The car has flaws, including a relatively steep price, flabby curb weight, mildly uncommunicative steering and the lack, for now, of a manual-transmission option. But for an initial salvo against the Porsche 911 Cabriolet, and to a lesser extent the Porsche Boxster and Corvette Stingray, the F-Type made a crater-size impression. 
 And this British-built roadster reminded me that when a sports car nails the sex, sound and speed equation, it’s easy to forgive the little things. 
 In a bit of reverse colonialism, in 2008 Tata Motors of India plucked the Jaguar and Land Rover brands from Ford for $2.3 billion, partly to wedge its way into China’s luxury car market. Of the two marques, Land Rover has long carried more than its weight. But critically praised new models are finally giving Jaguar a lift, with American sales up 36 percent this year and global sales rising 38 percent. 
 Befitting its brand name, the Jaguar F-Type is a snarling, clawing animal — especially in the guise of the supercharged 495-horsepower F-Type V8 S, starting at $92,895. That’s 40 more horses than the new Stingray, 95 more than the 911 Carerra S Cabrio. 
 A dash from standstill to 60 miles per hour takes just over four seconds, with a peak speed of 186 m.p.h. But just as important is how the F-Type gets there and how it returns to a stop: with a such a fusillade of popping, backfiring exhaust noise that civilians might dive for cover. 
 The rumble is faintly ridiculous, yes, but also inspired and incendiary. It is simply one of the best V8 engine sounds in the business, aided by a driver-adjustable adaptive exhaust (on V8 and V6 S models) and four artillery-size exhaust outlets. 
 I didn’t drive the V6 S, but I have heard it. That car’s 380-horsepower, 3-liter supercharged engine has its own sonic charms along with a lower base price of $81,895. Drivers who prize roadster style and fun over sheer velocity can dip down to $69,985 for the basic F-Type V6, with a 340-horse version of the supercharged V6. 
 But there’s no getting around it: even that 340-horse “starter” F-Type costs $13,000 more than the 455-horsepower Stingray convertible and nearly $7,000 more than the Boxster S. 
 The 6-cylinder Jaguars are still quick, with 0-to-60 times of 5.1 seconds for the base V6 and 4.8 seconds for the V6 S. All three versions share a well-insulated fabric top, which I repeatedly popped open while driving around New York City and points north — it operates at speeds up to 30 m.p.h. — during a recent period of spectacular fall weather. 
 The roof tucks away without stealing space from the petite 7.1-cubic-foot trunk. My large wheeled carry-on just fit, with side room to spare. But you can load two carry-ons in the Corvette convertible’s roomier hatch and three in the 911, with its front trunk and bonus rear-seat storage. 
 But people who love the Jag’s English flair won’t be taking a tape measure to the trunk. The car’s classic oval grille, flared hips and beautifully drawn rear deck — reminiscent of the exotic BMW Z8 — push all the right buttons for sports-car fans. Like its modern stablemates, this Jaguar looks fast, desirable and just a bit dangerous. (A coupe version of the F-Type, to be unveiled Nov. 19 at the Los Angeles Auto Show, goes on sale in the spring.) 
 Hidden door handles extend automatically when you unlock the car, a nice technical touch. An interior button deploys the rear spoiler at a cocky angle. 
1
