Mysterious Justice Samuel Alito
Credit T. J. Hamilton/The Grand Rapids Press, via Associated Press

Five years into his tenure, Justice Samuel Alito is the one conservative on the Supreme Court without a flashy legal signature. We know what to expect from the other justices on the court’s reliable right: Antonin Scalia has his constitutional theory of originalism, often in the company of Clarence Thomas. Chief Justice John Roberts also tends to lead with big legal principles. Alito usually reaches the same results as the others, but he does it by being small-bore. “He’s the offensive linesman on the team,” a clerk who worked for Alito when he was a federal judge says. “He puts his head down and stays focused on the case in front of him.”
By operating one case at a time, rather than from a grand vision, Alito has proved himself to be the closest thing conservatives have to a feelings justice. In fact, it’s lately from Alito that we get a window onto right-wing empathy on the court — and onto conservative instincts generally about who deserves our solicitude. Through it we see that Alito expresses feelings mostly for people who are a lot like him. Republicans pummeled Obama when he named empathy as a quality worth pursuing in his Supreme Court nominees. But they don’t complain about Alito, whose record shows that selective empathy can be deployed in the service of piling vote upon conservative vote.
Alito attracted notice earlier this month for his lone dissent in the free-speech suit Albert Snyder brought against the Westboro Baptist Church for picketing the funeral of his son, a soldier who was killed in Iraq. (The church’s odious way of protesting homosexuality is to stand outside military funerals holding signs like “Thank God for Dead Soldiers.”) Alito sided with Snyder, and as the Cornell law professor Michael Dorf pointed out on his blog, the justice’s dissent seemed driven mostly by fellow feeling for the grieving father before him. To Alito, the emotional distress that Snyder experienced because of the church’s actions trumped its members’ First Amendment right to demonstrate. Alito placed himself in the position of the father: “Mr. Snyder wanted what is surely the right of any parent who experiences such an incalculable loss: to bury his son in peace.”
Alito sounded a similar note two years ago, in describing Frank Ricci, a white firefighter who sued New Haven for reverse discrimination when the city threw out the results of a test that would have promoted Ricci but would have elevated very few black and Hispanic candidates. In concurring with the court’s 5-4 ruling in Ricci’s favor, Alito wrote of the “personal sacrifices” Ricci and other plaintiffs had made — Ricci is dyslexic and studied many hours a day for the test — in seeking “only a fair chance to move up the ranks.”
When Alito testified during his 2006 confirmation hearings, he talked about the influence his Italian-immigrant roots have on his judging. In immigration cases, Alito said, “I do say to myself, ‘You know, this could be your grandfather, this could be your grandmother.’ ” He continued: “When I get a case about discrimination, I have to think about people in my own family who suffered discrimination because of their ethnic background or because of religion or because of gender. And I do take that into account.”
By focusing on Albert Snyder and Frank Ricci, Alito does a service by making us confront the human costs that liberals often turn from. Does protecting free speech mean allowing people to wreck a soldier’s funeral? Does equal protection require taking away promotions that have already been promised? The answers may still be yes, but Alito reminds us that this stirs real anger.
However, the trouble is that Alito’s sense of empathy never seems to involve an act of imagination; it rarely extends to people who are not like him. Alito had no kind words for Lilly Ledbetter, for example, who for almost 20 years was paid less than the men doing the same job she held as a supervisor at Goodyear Tire and Rubber. In 2007, he wrote the 5-4 decision turning away Ledbetter’s sex-discrimination suit because she didn’t go to court soon enough; she didn’t know about the pay discrepancy until years later. (Congress disagreed with the Supreme Court’s ruling and passed a law to scrap it.) In general, Alito has been no more likely to uphold civil rights claims than Roberts, and only somewhat more likely than Scalia and Thomas.
Meanwhile, Alito is the least likely justice to show a glimmer of concern for the rights of criminal defendants. He has ruled for the defense in only 17 percent of the criminal cases he has heard since he joined the court, putting him to the right of Roberts, Scalia, Thomas — and every other justice of the past 65 years other than William Rehnquist, according to Lee Epstein, a professor of law and political science at Northwestern, who ran the numbers for me in the Supreme Court database she works with.
All the pieces of Alito’s record fit together. As a prosecutor, a federal-appeals judge and now as a Supreme Court justice, Alito is defined not by his broad ideas but by his consistency. Instead of the pizzazz of Scalia or the polish of Roberts, Alito makes his mark by getting to the outcomes conservatives favor with whatever tool is at hand and with even more predictability.
It’s unsurprising then that Alito’s one YouTube moment was tinged with partisanship. At Obama’s 2010 State of the Union address, Alito mouthed the words “not true,” shaking his head and frowning, after the president said the court had reversed “a century of law that I believe will open the floodgates for special interests — including foreign corporations — to spend without limit in our elections.” Obama was referring to the court’s Citizens United ruling, in which a majority of five, including Alito, struck down Congressional campaign-financing reforms, saying that corporations can spend without limit, because restricting their spending interferes with their free speech. In this case, unlike the Westboro Baptist case, Alito wasn’t moved by the idea of curtailing the First Amendment to protect other values, like preventing political corruption.
Recently, Lee Epstein examined the decisions of 21 justices, going back to 1969, to see how often they strike down or uphold laws along partisan lines. She and her co-author, Andrew Martin, found that liberal judges are most likely to uphold liberal laws and strike down conservative ones. (The former justice William O. Douglas, for example, took nearly every opportunity to do the latter.) Conservative justices are most likely to do the reverse. Among them, Alito was the most likely justice to let a law stand when it was favored by the political right — and the second most likely (behind only Thomas) to kick a liberal-oriented law to the curb. Another justice might have tried to steer clear of the top spot on this chart. For Alito, there is nowhere else to be.
Emily Bazelon, a contributing writer, is a senior editor at Slate and the Truman Capote law-and-media fellow at Yale Law School. 
A version of this article appears in print on March 20, 2011, on Page MM13 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Mysterious Justice.
