Roast Pumpkin, Radicchio And Feta Salad Recipe
Ingredients
 Scant 2 pounds peeled pumpkin, cut into 1 1/2-inch cubes 
 1 tablespoon vegetable oil 
 ½ small red onion, peeled and finely sliced into half-moons 
 Juice of 2 limes 
 ⅓ cup pine nuts 
 2 tablespoons peanut oil or olive oil 
 ¼ teaspoon pumpkinseed oil or olive oil (see note) 
 7 to 8 ounces feta cheese, broken into bite-sized pieces 
 1 ½ cups (about 6 ounces) radicchio cut into bite-size pieces 
 Nutritional Information
 
Nutritional analysis per serving (4 servings)
 391 calories; 29 grams fat; 10 grams saturated fat; 0 grams trans fat; 10 grams monounsaturated fat; 7 grams polyunsaturated fat; 24 grams carbohydrates; 3 grams dietary fiber; 10 grams sugars; 12 grams protein; 47 milligrams cholesterol; 500 milligrams sodium 
 Note: The information shown is Edamam’s estimate based on available ingredients and preparation. It should not be considered a substitute for a professional nutritionist’s advice. 
 Powered by Edamam 
Preparation
Heat oven to 400 degrees. Rub pumpkin with vegetable oil, and arrange in a single layer on a baking sheet. Bake until just tender all the way through, about 45 minutes. Remove, cool, cover, and refrigerate until needed. (May be done a day ahead.)
In a small bowl, combine onion with lime juice, and steep for 15 to 30 minutes. Meanwhile, toss pine nuts in a small dry skillet over medium heat until lightly browned; remove from heat, and set aside.
Add peanut oil and pumpkinseed oil to onion mixture, and mix well. In a large bowl, combine pumpkin, feta, radicchio, onion mixture and half the pine nuts. Mix everything gently by hand, and turn out onto a large plate or wide shallow bowl. Garnish with remaining pine nuts, and serve.
 Tip 
Pumpkinseed oil is $18 for 250 milliliters (8.45 ounces) at Dean & DeLuca, (212) 226-6800; at Zabar's, 17 ounces is $17.98, (212) 787-2000.


 Like this recipe? 
Let's Get Started




Merci
You now have full access to The New Essentials of French Cooking. We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
