Classical Music in NYC This Week
A model of the set (by John Macfarlane) for David McVicar’s new production of “Tosca.” See listing below. Credit Metropolitan Opera

Our guide to the city’s best classical music and opera.
ARTEK at Old St. Patrick’s Cathedral (Dec. 29, 8 p.m.). There is a feast of baroque music on offer this week, at a time of year when the classical offerings are bare. In addition to Tenet’s two concerts (see below), the distinguished ensemble Artek presents this concert of vespers music by Johann Rosenmüller, a successor of Monteverdi’s at St. Mark’s basilica in Venice and a crucial force in the blending of Italian and German styles. Directed by Gwendolyn Toth, the program includes psalms, motets and a magnificat.
artekearlymusic.org
The Listings
 It’s a big city and there’s lots to do. See picks chosen by Times editors and critics for theater, pop & rock music, classical music, comedy, dance, movies, art and events for children. 
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (Jan. 4, 7:30 p.m., through Jan. 9). Jeffrey Kahane returns to the podium at the Philharmonic, in its first subscription program of the new year. He conducts Haydn’s Symphony No. 98, and leads Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 17 from the keyboard. In between, the star cellist Alisa Weilerstein, who is a regular and welcome guest soloist in these parts, is on hand for Tchaikovsky’s “Variations on a Rococo Theme.”
212-875-5656, nyphil.org
TENET at St. Joseph’s Church (Dec. 30, 7:30 p.m.) and at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church (Jan. 3, 7:30 p.m.). One of the city’s leading baroque ensembles is giving two worthwhile concerts this week. On Saturday, there’s one last birthday party for Claudio Monteverdi, whose 450th anniversary was celebrated this year with selections from his “Selva Morale e Spirituale,” the vast anthology of sacred music written while the composer worked at the St. Mark’s basilica in Venice. And on Wednesday, Christmas music by Michael Praetorius, Monteverdi’s German contemporary.
tenet.nyc
‘TOSCA’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Dec. 31, 6:30 p.m., through May 21). The opening night of David McVicar’s new production of Puccini’s classic finally comes around, or at least one hopes it does, because it seems as if this production were cursed. Let’s review: Since the casting was announced, it has lost its original Tosca (Kristine Opolais), its original Cavaradossi (Jonas Kaufmann), its original Scarpia (Bryn Terfel), its original conductor (Andris Nelsons) and its replacement conductor (James Levine). What’s left is decent enough: Emmanuel Villaume steps in to lead a cast including Sonya Yoncheva as Tosca, Vittorio Grigolo as Cavaradossi, and Zeljko Lucic as Scarpia. Note that this run ends on Jan. 27, but the production returns on April 21, with the added bonus of Anna Netrebko in the title role.
212-362-6000, metopera.org
A version of this article appears in print on December 29, 2017, on Page C23 of the New York edition with the headline: Classical. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
