Will a Landlord Accept an Out-of-State Guarantor?
Credit Federica Del Proposto

Q. My friends and I are planning to move to New York City from Ohio. We are all aspiring opera singers, so our combined income is not adequate to qualify for an apartment. We have cash saved, but do not have jobs yet, so we don’t have proof of employment. Instead, we plan to ask relatives to guarantee our lease. Do landlords accept guarantors who live outside the tristate area? If we have more than one guarantor, does each one have to earn enough to guarantee the entire lease, or will a landlord consider combined income?
 Ask Real Estate 
 Submit your questions, share your stories and tell us what topics interest you most. Post a comment or email us at realestateqa@nytimes.com. 
A. You and your friends will not be the first people to move to New York to pursue creative passions without having jobs lined up. So you should be able to find a landlord willing to accept a gainfully employed relative (or two) to guarantee your lease, even if the guarantor lives in another part of the country. The slow rental market should work in your favor.
“I don’t think it’ll be an issue for them to find apartment,” said Evan Rugen, a salesman at the brokerage Citi Habitats.
Keep in mind, though, that landlords have higher financial expectations for guarantors than they do for tenants. While a credit score of 680 is generally fine for a tenant, guarantors often need to have a score of around 700, according to Erin Whitney, a saleswoman at Bohemia Realty Group, which specializes in Upper Manhattan. “It’s very important that they’re reliable,” she said, “and that’s what a credit score attests to.”
As for income requirements, landlords look for guarantors who earn as much as 80 times the monthly rent, double what is expected of a tenant. Since not everyone earns $240,000 a year, the income needed to guarantee a $3,000-a-month apartment, landlords will usually combine the incomes of the guarantors to reach that threshold. “Most landlords allow multiple guarantors,” Ms. Whitney said, “because they understand that tenants are sharing the rent.”
Landlords are also more flexible in some neighborhoods and boroughs than in others. Focus your search in places where the rental market is slowest, such as Downtown Brooklyn, which has a glut of new apartments. Mr. Rugen said, “In areas that are struggling to fill apartments, you can probably bend the rules.”
To submit your question or comments, email realestateqa@nytimes.com.
For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.
A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 2017, on Page RE2 of the New York edition with the headline: Will the Landlord Accept Our Far-Flung Guarantors?. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
