At 'Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear' by Two Satirists, Thousands — Billions? — Respond
It was a Democratic rally without a Democratic politician, featuring instead two political satirists, Mr. Stewart and Mr. Colbert, who used the stage to rib journalists and fear-mongering politicians, and to argue with each other over the songs “Peace Train” and “Crazy Train.” 
 Though at no point during the show did either man plug a candidate, a strong current of political engagement coursed through the crowd, which stretched several long blocks west of the Capitol, an overwhelming response to a call by Mr. Stewart on his “Daily Show.” The turnout clogged traffic and filled subway trains and buses to overflow. 
 The event, sponsored by Viacom’s Comedy Central network and televised live, was viewed by many in the crowd as a counterweight to Restoring Honor, a rally led by the Fox News Channel host Glenn Beck near the Lincoln Memorial two months ago. Some participants staged a protest near a Fox News satellite truck. 
 The National Park Service did not offer a formal crowd estimate. But Judy McGrath, the chief executive of Viacom’s MTV Networks unit, said she had been told by the Parks Service that there were “well over 200,000 people” at the rally. Mr. Colbert offered his own guess in a Twitter message: “Early estimate of crowd size at rally: 6 billion.” 
 For many, the rally on Saturday was an opportunity to take control of the political narrative, if only for one sunny afternoon. Participants, overwhelmingly liberal, wore political buttons, waved flags and carried signs, often with funny messages. 
 A cluster of women in their 50s held small white signs that read, “Shrinks for sanity.” A man in a fleece jacket held a sign that said, “I can see the real America from my house.” 
 Other signs were absurdist. Daniel Short, 29, a visual effects artist from New York, said the message of his sign, taped to a cardboard tube — “Tights are not pants” — was “just another one of those silent majority issues.” 
 Protests also came in costume. One man wearing a diaper and a sombrero carried a large wooden anchor — a depiction of an “anchor baby,” the name conservative talk show hosts have given to children born in the United States to illegal immigrant parents. 
 “I’m feeling a little exposed,” he said after the rally ended. 
 But beyond the goofiness, the rally seemed to be channeling a craving to be heard and frustration with a lack of leadership, less by President Obama than by a Democratic Party that many participants described as timid, fearful and failing to stand up for what they see as Mr. Obama’s accomplishments. 
 “I’m proud of Obama, but the Democrats in Congress, they’re just running for cover,” said Ron Harris, a lawyer from Laguna Beach, Calif., who came to celebrate his 64th birthday. “They couldn’t sell bread to a starving mother if God was standing next to them.” 
 It was a measure of the topsy-turvy nature of politics these days that it was comedians, not politicians, who were able to channel their frustration. 
 “We don’t have any place to turn,” said Michelle Sabol, 41, a jewelry designer from Pittsburgh. Mr. Stewart, she said, gave voice to her feeling of frustration and isolation. 
 Four friends, dressed as giant tea bags in a spoof of the Tea Party, said Mr. Stewart and Mr. Colbert were the only ones they felt expressed their point of view. 
 “For everything that’s happened in the past two years, ‘The Daily Show’ is how we cope,” said one of the tea bags, S. J. Klein, a 40-year-old man from Anchorage. 
 Alex Foxworthy, a 26-year-old doctoral student from Richmond, Va., summed it up like this: “The battle for the American mind right now is between talk show hosts and comedians. I choose the comedians.” 
 Mr. Colbert plays an archconservative on his show, “The Colbert Report,” and at the rally he played a victim of fear gradually shown the light by Mr. Stewart. 
 “Your reasonableness is poisoning my fear,” Mr. Colbert said in mock exasperation. 
 Mark St. John, 57, of Indianapolis, came on a bus he had rented with more than 50 friends. He said he wanted to express his irritation with what he felt was doublespeak and misrepresentation of Mr. Obama’s initiatives by conservative pundits. 
 “I’m tired of the silliness,” he said, squeezed into a coffee shop near the rally. “Health care as a government takeover? That’s just not what it was.” 
 And while few interviewed in the crowd seemed to find common ground with people on the other side of the political divide, often referring to those with different political views as “them,” Mr. St. John said that he socialized with many people he disagreed with politically. 
 “They’re sane, and they’re not bigots,” he said. “But when you feel economically threatened, you make certain decisions.” 
 Some were actively canvassing. Near the National Gallery of Art, Carol Newmyer, 55, handed out bumper stickers that said, “Give Change a Chance.” She planned to go to a Democratic phone bank later in the day to help with get-out-the-vote efforts. 
 “I want to see the heart and soul of the Democrats that elected Obama come out and vote again,” Ms. Newmyer said. 
 For his part, Mr. Stewart struck a somewhat serious note during the rally’s finale, appealing for bipartisanship. 
 “We know instinctively as a people that if we are to get through the darkness and back into the light, we have to work together,” he said. “And sometimes the light at the end of the tunnel isn’t the promised land. Sometimes it’s just New Jersey. But we do it anyway, together.” 
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:
Correction: October 31, 2010
An earlier version of this article referred imprecisely to the geographical reach of the rally. It stretched several long blocks west of the Capitol, not almost to the Washington Monument.
