Celebrity Guest Solver Elayne Boosler: Soft T's
T-shirts for sale at a clothing store on Broadway in Manhattan. Credit Tyler Hicks/The New York Times

SUNDAY’S PUZZLE — I’ve written a few times about the Extremely Spunky Border Terrier who lives with me as the brains behind the Wordplay organization, and it’s rare to find someone who loves dogs even more than I do. I think I’ve finally met my match in Elayne Boosler.
Ms. Boosler is known to us as a very funny comedian, yet she is so much more. In the 1980s, she successfully financed her own special at a time when women were not able to secure comedy specials on cable television, blowing the doors open for female comedians on cable TV. She has performed for people as varied as former president Bill Clinton and Queen Elizabeth II of England, and she has moderated a Democratic presidential candidates debate on C-SPAN for the National Organization for Women. Nearest to her heart, I believe, is her passion for promoting animal adoption, which primarily manifests itself in her activity with Tails of Joy, a nonprofit organization that raises funds for rescuers all over the country and beyond. Ms. Boosler is appearing as a regular on John Fugelsang’s Current TV show, “Viewpoint.”
Elayne Boosler’s Notes
I see “Soft T’s” and my head takes off: “What’s the formula? TH’s? Missing T’s? Soft tease — Gypsy Rose Lee? Softees — Snuggle Bear, Pillsbury Dough Boy, tissues, Mr. Softee, your grandma?” If it wasn’t The New York Times, it might be actresses who haven’t had implants. I always try to figure out the formula before looking at any clues. It’s hard enough to write good jokes, but to construct a crossword containing twisted punch lines that surprise and delight, well, mad props. Any time I don’t see the end of a joke coming, I doff my cap. Doff is such a crossword word, isn’t it? 
You can also usually count on STEN, E.L.O., ENO (the most famous musician in crossword history after ONO), either SSE or NNW (I’m never good with directions), some state south or east of some other state, NONA Hendryx instead of Jimi, and either ETA or ETD. If they sold little crossword survival kits, those words would be included, along with coffee, a pen, and noise-canceling headphones. I can’t work a crossword with any media on in the background. I can’t come up with words while hearing words.
What I enjoyed about solving this puzzle was of course the wordplay of the”th”s for “t”s, as I’m a huge mangled language fan. Blame the Marx Brothers. I loved how beautifully the puns lent themselves to the clues. Once I “got” the formula, I had a lot of fun guessing the answers before checking the clues that led to them. I left four blank squares in this puzzle, as I don’t know who Athena turned into a spider (ARACHNE) crossing a central Swiss canton (URI), though I feel I should. I’m thinking by next Wednesday I will come back and just be able to write them in.
I’ve been in about 45 newspaper crossword puzzles, mostly The New York Times. “Funny Boosler.” I don’t flatter myself that it’s anything more than the puzzle creators trying to dupe the public with my “Y,” as opposed to Ela-I-ne. I’ll take it, although on the last International Women’s Day I was crossed by Golda Meir. Friends will excitedly say, “Wow!! You’re 18 down!!” But I know in my heart of hearts, real fame will only come when one day, the puzzle says, “62 Across. See 18 Down.” 
Years ago, I was negotiating to be in a Broadway show. We were far apart on money, when the big New York producer said to me, “Frankly, I don’t really even know who you are.” That Sunday, I was in the New York Times crossword puzzle. I got the salary I asked for. I may owe you guys a commission. 
Two years ago, I was having eye surgery. I was terrified. That morning I was in the New York Times crossword puzzle. I brought it into surgery and wrote across the top, ‘Dear Dr. Devgan, please take very good care of 22 Across.” He was delighted. I can see!
I absolutely love crosswords, Scrabble, word puzzles. My husband’s “one night off from the marriage” list is Claudia Schiffer. Mine is Will Shortz. And Sandy Koufax, but I digress.
I’m dyslexic. As a child riding in the car, I spelled my first word like this: “Bar. R-A-B. Bar.” I can sing backwards any song you can name, which once came in very handy while speaking to an assembly of fifth graders who wanted none of me until I had them shout out songs, after which they wouldn’t let me go. I see everything backwards first, I can write upside down and backwards. I speak French, which means that my travel days are filled with French words backwards and forwards, followed by their English counterparts in every direction, after which they become the jumble, which I also do in my head without pen nor paper. Every day in Europe is exhausting for me. Rodney Dangerfield used to say to me, “You have a very busy head.”
For me, every crossword starts the same way. I look at 1 Across and then I do 1 – 4 or 5 Down in my head and so on, all through the puzzle. I use a pen and don’t write anything down until I am sure of at least one solid letter. I love that when you’ve done all you possibly can, and finally walk away, your brain keeps quietly working on it, so that when you come back hours later you can just fill it all right in. I love that our brains quietly go about solving our problems while we consciously tend to other things. I’ve also learned to accept imperfection, as in, there is usually one square in the puzzle that will remain blank. Whether it’s the second letter down of the blood of the Greek gods, or the second letter across of arsenic (rat’s bane), I never look words up. I accept that life is never neatly finished, that nothing is perfect, that things don’t always fit, that you can always be better, that there is something to come back for. Of course I’d rather solve it. 
What a great philosophy. Thanks for stopping by, Ms. Boosler. Let’s let Ms. Boosler take us to the Monday puzzle with her fabulous routine about her beloved dogs:
Your thoughts?
