Morocco Will Challenge U.S.-Led Bid for 2026 World Cup
Morocco’s soccer federation said Friday that it would challenge a combined United States-Mexico-Canada bid to host the 2026 World Cup. Friday was the deadline for countries to apply to FIFA for consideration. Credit Matthias Schrader/Associated Press

Morocco will bid to host the 2026 World Cup, emerging as a last-minute challenger — and a potential complication — to a United States-led campaign that appeared to be coasting to victory unopposed.
The Royal Moroccan Football Federation announced its plans on Friday, the deadline set by FIFA for countries to confirm that they would bid, and said in a two-sentence statement on its website that it had submitted its application “to the relevant committees of FIFA.”
The United States Soccer Federation, in partnership with the Mexican and Canadian federations, confirmed its intention to bid in April. That bid remains an overwhelming favorite for the event, the first World Cup with 48 teams, because of North America’s surplus of stadiums, hotels, training facilities and infrastructure, and it has the support of the countries’ regional federation, Concacaf, and the FIFA confederation representing Oceania.
The North American bid was also helped by FIFA’s decision to clear the field of some of its biggest potential rivals. Earlier this year, FIFA confirmed that it would bar the confederations in Europe and Asia from bidding for 2026, locking out possible rivals like England and China, because Europe will host the 2018 tournament in Russia and Asia the 2022 event in Qatar.
In an effort to rotate the World Cup around the globe, FIFA blocks any of six confederations from hosting if they have been home to one of the previous two tournaments. So with four confederations either backing the United States bid or prohibited from challenging it, and South America focused on the 2030 race, that left only Africa as a wild card.
Morocco, a nation whose population of 33 million is one-tenth the size of the United States’, bid for the 1994, 1998, 2006 and 2010 World Cups, losing out each time in part because its rivals were deemed better equipped to pull off the event. Hosting an expanded tournament would require billions of dollars of investment, and as a result its decision to enter the race came as a mild surprise to some in FIFA. Africa has hosted the tournament only once, in South Africa in 2010. The United States, which lost a much criticized vote for the 2022 tournament, last hosted in 1994.
Under the United States-Mexico-Canada plan, the United States would get 60 of the 80 games, and every match from the quarterfinals through the championship game. Canada and Mexico, while full partners in the bid, would host matches only in earlier rounds.
The three countries were so confident in the strength of their proposal that in March, a month before revealing they would bid as a group, the presidents of the soccer federations of the United States, Mexico and Canada asked FIFA to grant them an exclusive window to prove that their bid met all the technical requirements for hosting the tournament.
In May, FIFA voted to approve an expedited process, extending the deadline for applications three months, a period that ended on Friday. FIFA will now carry out inspections of the bids and issue a final report to FIFA’s member associations by March 2018. A final vote will be held at the FIFA Congress three months later.
“We’ve always been prepared for the fact that other countries could also decide to bid for the 2026 FIFA World Cup,” U.S. Soccer President Sunil Gulati said in a statement released by the organizing committee for the North American bid. “Competition is good, and overall it shows the value and importance of the World Cup.”
A version of this article appears in print on August 12, 2017, on Page D4 of the New York edition with the headline: Morocco Complicates U.S. Bid for ’26 Cup.
