The Link Uniting Donors and Doers for Social Change
Stanley Druckenmiller, founder of Duquesne Capital Management, turned to Blue Meridian Partners to help him and other philanthropists channel their donations into fighting childhood poverty. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times

Stanley Druckenmiller, the hedge fund manager, wanted his charitable dollars to do more to reduce childhood poverty. He had been deeply involved with the Harlem Children’s Zone, which helps poor children and families in New York. But he said he wanted to do something to break the cycle of generational poverty, a goal seemingly beyond even a very wealthy person like himself.
“I’m not rich enough to do it alone,” said Mr. Druckenmiller, the founder of Duquesne Capital Management, whose net worth is estimated by Forbes at $4.7 billion. “If I was worth $50 billion or $60 billion, I’d go this alone, but I’m not.”
Likewise, Connie Ballmer, a co-founder of the Ballmer Group and the wife of Steven A. Ballmer, the former chief executive of Microsoft, had been giving money to child welfare organizations around Washington State. The Ballmers, with a net worth of more than $34 billion, wanted to find a way to team up with others to have a greater impact on the issue nationwide.
“People don’t want to hear this from me, but it’s really hard to give money away” to organizations focused on childhood poverty, she said. “It’s not as easy as picking a university or hospital to give to. You have to do a lot of research.”
Mr. Druckenmiller and his wife, Fiona, joined the Ballmers and other wealthy philanthropists, who have each committed $50 million to $250 million, to fund initiatives focused on reducing childhood poverty. They’re doing so through Blue Meridian Partners, a philanthropic fund created by the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation, which aims to invest $1 billion in other nonprofit organizations working on issues affecting poor children.
“We start with the belief that it’s actually possible to solve significant social problems confronting the children and youth living in poverty today,” said Nancy Roob, chief executive of Blue Meridian Partners and the foundation. “What brings people together and what makes it work are the opportunities to invest in leaders and strategies. It’s the opportunity to together solve problems that none of us would be able to do on our own.”
More than just pooling intellectual and financial resources to achieve change, groups like Blue Meridian are acting as “field catalysts,” according to a new academic paper in the Stanford Social Innovation Review. Such organizations, the paper’s author argues, can help solve intractable, societal problems that require resources beyond what even billionaires can marshal.
Taz Hussein, partner at the consultant Bridgespan Group and author of the report “Field Catalysts: The Unseen Agents That Galvanize Social Change,” said he and his colleagues had identified 15 social change efforts — like reducing malaria deaths, bringing about same-sex marriage, reducing obesity — and asked what big change would look like. They found that each effort had a core organization providing leadership and support to other groups tackling the same issue.
“These organizations would never say they were the organizations driving these changes,” Mr. Hussein said. “In terms of size relative to the total investment, these organizations are relatively small, and they’re nimble. They try to take that bird’s-eye view and problem solve. They helped to align funders.”
They were also, he said, “trying to be appropriately humble.”
Mr. Hussein identified the Freedom to Marry campaign, led by Evan Wolfson, a visiting professor at Yale and Georgetown Law Schools, as one such field catalyst.
Mr. Wolfson said he had begun working on the movement for same-sex marriage in 1983, when he wrote his law school thesis. The goal was achieved in 2015 with the Supreme Court ruling allowing marriage nationwide. He attributed the group’s success to having clarity around its goals and maintaining it over three decades.
“The campaign was Freedom to Marry, but it didn’t do everything,” Mr. Wolfson said. “There were lots of organizations. What Freedom to Marry did was, it woke up everyday thinking about what the strategy should be.”
Mr. Hussein said most field catalysts received financial backing from philanthropists who bought into the idea of the group’s activist founder, who typically plays the role of intermediary. In the case of Freedom to Marry, Mr. Wolfson said, two of its biggest donors came from opposite ends of the political spectrum: Jon Stryker, heir to the Stryker medical device company, and Paul Singer, the founder of the hedge fund Elliott Management.
Ms. Roob said Blue Meridian used a strategy that she called a performance-based road map to give recipients and donors markers for success that showed progress and activated additional funding. “If you just brought people together and said, ‘What can we do together?’, it wouldn’t work,” she said. “You have to create all the desire to get people together.”
Mr. Druckenmiller said what made this approach work was the group’s belief in Ms. Roob and what her team was doing to vet organizations.
“They’re the stock pickers,” he said. “They bring the ideas and the organizations. We all talk together about the potential and evaluate them. So far there’s been a remarkable consensus.”
One such organization is Upstream USA, which aims to make birth control available to women as a means to expand economic opportunity for them. Mark Edwards, one of the founders of the nonprofit organization, said it was introduced to Blue Meridian early on in its development.

With the Bloomberg administration acting as a field catalyst, New York’s ban on smoking inside bars and restaurants spread to other cities. Credit Yana Paskova for The New York Times

“When we started in 2014, we had a vision for going national,” he said. “But we didn’t have a clearly articulated plan about how we were going to get there.”
Before Blue Meridian offered any funding, he said, it helped Upstream flesh out that plan.
Other organizations come up with their own plans, which are often replicated.
Kevin Sheekey, global head of communications, government relations and marketing for Bloomberg L.P. and a senior adviser to Michael R. Bloomberg, describes Mr. Bloomberg, the billionaire former New York mayor, as someone who looks at the data and acts because it’s the rational choice. Mr. Bloomberg used this approach when he decided to ban smoking in restaurants and bars early in his first term and applied it later to his campaigns against trans fats and sugar.
“When we were doing smoking, he said, ‘Yeah, that’s the right thing to do,’” said Mr. Sheekey, who was running Mr. Bloomberg’s re-election campaign at the time and worried that the issue would cost him votes. “Once New York did it, people said, ‘We can do it, too.’ Then Paris did it, and London did it.”
In this way, the Bloomberg administration became a field catalyst for an issue that other cities quickly copied.
Wealthy individual donors are motivated to work together for the opportunity to take on a big problem where their insight and resources might make a difference.
Mr. Druckenmiller said he had become involved with Blue Meridian after his experience with the Harlem Children’s Zone. He saw the organization’s president, Geoffrey Canada, build on his initial idea and expand the number of children he helped. In doing so, Mr. Canada created a model that others have tried to emulate.
The appeal of Blue Meridian to Mr. Druckenmiller was the management group that brought the donors together and guided them.
“With my business, the way you make big money is, you find a great management team and a good concept and you stick to it and you add to it over time,” Mr. Druckenmiller said. “In philanthropy, there was more this idea that once an idea was formulated, you moved along.
“In my experience,” he continued, “the more successful an idea is, the easier it is to fund it. In philanthropy, it’s almost harder.”
There is also less risk dealing with an experienced field catalyst. Ms. Ballmer said she liked sharing opinions with the general partners at Blue Meridian.
“If you’re going to make bets, it’s nice to be surrounded by those individuals at the table,” she said. “They present the organizations that are in the pipeline. They present the upsides, downsides and the risks.”
Her hope, though, is that the group and others can show that these strategies work, so that larger organizations and government offices can adopt them.
There are risks for donors. One is making sure the group works in a cohesive way.
“There’s a limit not to the amount of capital we can bring in, but there is a limit to what makes an effective decision making body,” Ms. Roob said.
Another is getting the size of the grant right. Mr. Druckenmiller rejected the notion that too much money could be bad for smaller social service organizations.
“One of the biggest challenges to great leaders is, they don’t dream big enough because they don’t think the capital is available, or they’re spending 75 or 80 percent of their time fund-raising,” he said. “They could be spending their time on their mission.”
The leaders of Upstream learned to dream big. Its first budget in 2015 was $1.5 million; it’s now $17 million, including the first $1 million from Blue Meridian. But it could receive as much as $60 million from the group over the next seven years.
But Mr. Edwards said the motivation for expansion was not the money as much as the strategy that Blue Meridian helped Upstream develop.
“They’re always asking the question, ‘Is that what you want to do?’” he said. “For us, a relatively new nonprofit operating in an area that doesn’t have a lot of visibility, it’s been enormously helpful. There’s a lot of opportunity to check in. They’re in for the long haul.”
A version of this article appears in print on October 14, 2017, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: Linking the Donors With the Doers for Social Change.
