Polenta With Parmesan and Olive Oil-Fried Eggs Recipe
Ingredients
 4 ½ cups low-sodium broth or water 
 1 ½ cups polenta (not quick-cooking), coarse corn meal or corn grits 
 ¾ teaspoon salt 
 2 to 4 tablespoons butter 
 ¼ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, more to taste 
 1 1-ounce chunk or 1/4 cup grated Parmesan cheese 
 2 tablespoons olive oil 
 8 large eggs 
 Coarse sea salt for garnish 
 Nutritional Information
 
Nutritional analysis per serving (4 servings)
 527 calories; 27 grams fat; 10 grams saturated fat; 0 grams trans fat; 11 grams monounsaturated fat; 3 grams polyunsaturated fat; 48 grams carbohydrates; 2 grams dietary fiber; 1 gram sugars; 19 grams protein; 399 milligrams cholesterol; 721 milligrams sodium 
 Note: The information shown is Edamam’s estimate based on available ingredients and preparation. It should not be considered a substitute for a professional nutritionist’s advice. 
 Powered by Edamam 
Preparation
In a large pot, bring broth or water to a simmer. Stir in the polenta and salt. Simmer, stirring frequently, until thickened to taste, 10 to 20 minutes. Stir in butter and pepper; cover pot to keep warm.
Using a vegetable peeler, slice cheese into slivers, or grate it on largest holes of a box grater.
In a large skillet, heat 1 tablespoon olive oil until very hot. Fry 4 eggs until edges are crispy and yolks still runny. Repeat with remaining oil and eggs.
Pile polenta into 4 bowls and top with cheese and then fried eggs. Garnish with sea salt and more pepper and serve.


 Like this recipe? 
Let's Get Started




Merci
You now have full access to The New Essentials of French Cooking. We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
 We've saved the recipes from this guide to your Recipe Box for easy access anytime you visit.
