Japan’s Economic Plan Has Blanks to Fill
TOKYO — The Japanese government is set to approve a new growth strategy billed as a fundamental rethinking of the economy, tackling deflation and renewing its energy policy after the natural and nuclear disasters of last year.
The plan, a final draft of which was released on Monday, contains goals like helping to create by 2020 more than 100 trillion yen, or $1.3 trillion, worth of new industry and 4.7 million jobs in fields like renewable energy and medicine.
But despite the grand headlines, the strategy — which is set to be approved on Tuesday by the cabinet of Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda — adds little to the vague promises Japanese policy makers have made for months, if not years, with few results.
“The government will continue to watch financial markets closely and will take decisive action when necessary,” the draft says, in an effort to break what it describes as a vicious cycle of a strong yen and deflation that has weighed on economic growth.
And though the strategy identifies Japan’s aging, shrinking population as a chief impediment to growth, it suggests few new ways of dealing with it. There is no new approach to immigration — a traditionally delicate topic in Japan, which sees itself as an ethnically uniform country — and it merely hints of tweaking immigration rules to try to attract more skilled workers, and only after further discussion.
The strategy seeks to lower the cultural and structural barriers that prevent new mothers from returning to work, setting a goal for raising the percentage to 55 percent, an increase experts say would immediately help the work force. But the strategy does not appear to give much priority to addressing a severe shortage in day care centers in Japanese cities, for example, which may help families balance careers and child rearing.
The document remains vague on other contentious topics, skirting a much-debated trans-Pacific free trade agreement that would benefit exporters but that is opposed by the farming lobby.
The strategy does outline plans that would make Japan a leader in renewable energy and environmental technologies. It calls for policies that would bolster the ratio of fuel-efficient cars like gasoline-electric hybrids and electric vehicles to 50 percent of new-car sales by 2020. It promises to help Japanese companies attain 50 percent of the market for rechargeable batteries by the same year.
But it leaves the decision on Japan’s post-Fukushima energy mix to another committee that is debating energy policy. The government has said it wants to reduce dependence on nuclear power, which used to provide about 30 percent of the country’s electricity needs.
The committee is studying various plans — from reducing that ratio to about 25 percent to taking Japan off nuclear power entirely — and is expected to have a recommendation this year.
The Nikkei, the largest daily business newspaper in Japan, criticized the document, calling it “wide-ranging but lacking any breakthrough policies.” It quoted Tadashi Okamura, the head of the Japan Chamber of Commerce, as saying he found it “difficult to get a real sense” of how the government would encourage growth.
A version of this article appears in print on July 31, 2012, on Page B6 of the New York edition with the headline: Japan’s Economic Plan Has Blanks to Fill.
