Video Review: 2015 Volkswagen Golf, a Crowd-Pleaser in Many Forms
THE Volkswagen Golf was introduced in 1974, effectively replacing the original people’s car, the Beetle. Now, 40 years later, Golf is not as beloved (there’s no reboot of “The Love Bug” with a Golf as Herbie, is there?), but this seventh-generation hatchback deserves immense respect. It has won nearly every award, including North American Car of the Year and World Car of the Year.
Named after the wind Americans would spell “gulf” (not the sport) it’s all the car most of us need. Make that cars, because the Golf has plenty of powertrain choices that transform it. There is the all-electric e-Golf, an incredibly fuel-efficient TDI diesel, the high-performance GTI and an even more potent all-wheel-drive R model. A two-door 5-speed manual Golf starts at $18,815 with destination, and various models can please all but the luxury buyer.
Most will choose the TSI that, fully loaded with an excellent $900 lighting package, comes in just under $30,000. If that seems expensive, the Golf has that intangible German feel, very comfortable, quiet and refined, which gives the model value.
TSI gets its scoot from a velvety-smooth 1.8-liter turbocharged 4-cylinder engine, producing 170 horsepower and 200 pound-feet of torque low in the power band, with the dash to 60 in just under eight seconds. A 6-speed automatic is standard in the top-line SEL model that I drove. No, it’s not the lovely dual clutch unit in the GTI, but there are paddle shifters.
Advertisement
As for mileage, the Golf with the automatic transmission is rated at 25 city and 36 highway. I averaged 28 while fully appreciating that the TSI was a hoot to chuck into corners. It handles better than most competitors’ sport models and makes me question why people pay extra for an Audi.
Actually, it’s understandable. The Audi A3 has the sedan shape Americans like (and that premium badge), and we also tend to avoid hatchbacks. I stashed two large boxes in the back of the Golf. Try that in an A3 or Jetta; it’s doubtful one would wedge in.
In the cabin, VW’s touch screen interface is smartly designed, and additional functions pop up when a hand approaches the smallish screen. The Fender sound system rocks, but plugging a phone or iPod directly into it requires a proprietary cord. No USB port? Note to VW: It’s 2015. You’ll want to rectify that.
Reliability? Gabriel Shenhar of Consumer Reports says Volkswagen as a brand is average, saying there are variations within model lines. For instance, the Jetta TDI has average reliability, but the gas version is below average. The upscale look and feel of the Golf is a powerful draw. It may not be the people’s car, but it certainly is a crowd-pleaser.
A version of this article appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page B4 of the New York edition with the headline: From Volkswagen, a Crowd-Pleaser in Many Forms. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
