CNN Center
A dry cleaner offering wash and fold and same day service for people with a fast-paced lifestyle.
Mon-Fri: 7:30am-6:00pm; Closed Sun
 404-577-1070

Full line of services includes packing, shipping and express mailing.
Mon-Fri: 11am-4pm; Closed Sat-Sun
404-524-3692

Business center located at the corporate entrance and a 24-hour ATM located in the retail area. 
Mon-Fri: 9am-4pm; Closed Sat-Sun
 404-322-5707
CNN Studio Tours
Get exclusive, behind-the-scenes access to the world headquarters of CNN, only with CNN Studio Tours. Take a 50-minute walking tour with your very own guide through the halls of CNN Center and get an inside look at how a live broadcast is produced and sent to viewers all over the world. You will also get a more in-depth look at how the world’s largest news organization operates. From the historic first newscast to the now living legacy, learn how CNN became the worldwide leader in news. For more information or to make a reservation, please call 1-877-4CNNTOUR or visit us online at tours.cnn.com.
Atlanta CityPASS:
 Save 40% off admission to CNN Studio Tours, plus 4 more top Atlanta attractions: Georgia Aquarium Anytime Pass, World of Coca-Cola, Zoo Atlanta OR Center for Civil & Human Rights, Fernbank Museum of Natural History OR College Football Hall of Fame and Chick-fil-A Fan Experience. You’ll skip most ticket lines, too. Adult: $75 plus tax (value $125); Child (3-12): $59 plus tax (value $100). Valid 9-days. Purchase booklets or printable vouchers at citypass.com or at the CNN Studio Tours box office for the same low price.
CNN Studio Tours
Georgia Aquarium
World of Coca-Cola
Zoo Atlanta OR Center for Civil and Human Rights
Fernbank Museum of Natural History OR College Football Hall of Fame and Chick-fil-A Fan Experience
Centennial Park District
Downtown Atlanta has so many options when it comes to things to do, where to stay and what to eat, but don’t fret! The Centennial Park District is a vibrant, active place to be during your stay and they have put together everything you need to plan your trip to downtown Atlanta on the  Centennial Park District website.  
To further enhance your visit, the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau has gathered all things Atlanta in one helpful and convenient location at  atlanta.net . They provide an events calendar, top things to do in Atlanta, hotel packages and more! To discover Atlanta and plan your visit, the ACVB will be able to help with every detail. 
Directions to CNN Center
