Message From Homs
In the last four days, at least 800 people — mostly women, children and the elderly — have been evacuated from Homs, one of Syria’s most embattled cities in what was an important, yet pathetically incomplete, humanitarian pause in the fighting. Brokered by the United Nations, the pause has been extended until Wednesday, giving more civilians a chance to escape the relentless bombardment and deprivation.
At best, the evacuation is likely to save only a fraction of the civilians in danger. Thousands more remain in Homs, and millions more around the country are under attack and being denied food, medicine and other necessities. Meanwhile, even with the truce, civilians and aid workers remain at serious risk. Over the weekend, mortar rounds and gunfire struck near aid convoys, damaging vehicles and leaving victims lying in the streets.
And while civilians are theoretically protected under international law, many were exposed to sniper fire as they fled. Others, fearing that those left behind would be massacred, refused to leave. The United Nations’ humanitarian chief, Valerie Amos, condemned both the army and rebel forces, saying that United Nations and Syrian Red Crescent workers had been “deliberately targeted.”
The United Nations Security Council has failed to respond to the bloodshed, largely because of Russia’s slavish allegiance to President Bashar al-Assad. It must at least find the resolve to improve on the pause and extend it to other population centers. Later this week, it is expected to entertain a resolution that would pressure the government and the rebels to allow organizations delivering humanitarian aid to operate freely; providing supplies to civilians and giving them the means to escape seems an acceptable response.
Advertisement
A political solution leading to a transitional government remains the best outcome, but it is a long shot. While a first round of peace talks in Geneva ended inconclusively 10 days ago, Lakhdar Brahimi, the United Nations’ mediator, was right to convene a new round on Monday.
And a political solution is not out of the question if some right choices are made. The United States, for one, should drop its opposition to including Iran, which supplies arms and other assistance to Mr. Assad, in the negotiations. Russia, another weapons supplier, could send a powerful message to Mr. Assad by suspending its arms deliveries. Saudi Arabia and Qatar could send the same message to Mr. Assad’s opposition by ending weapons deliveries to the rebels. And Turkey could close its border to the foreign fighters that have turned Syria into a cauldron of extremist elements that threaten the entire region.
