How to Stuff a Wild Bikini Bottom
DR. CONSTANTINO MENDIETA, a plastic surgeon in Miami, has never seen a woman's backside that he didn't want to tweak with a little surgery.
"A casual observer might think that's a pretty buttocks over there in the pink sweatpants with the narrow waist and full bottom," Dr. Mendieta said one evening last month as he pointed to a young woman window-shopping on Lincoln Road in Miami Beach. Perched at an outdoor cafe table under an orange umbrella, Dr. Mendieta had agreed to a reporter's request that he rate buttocks as they sashayed by -- all in the interest of medicine of course.
"But, professionally speaking, I would enhance her buttocks by adding more fullness and projection at the middle and the top," he said. "I can always make a pretty butt even prettier."
After decades spent developing and refining treatments for the breasts, a few American plastic surgeons are beginning to focus on procedures for the buttocks. Dr. Mendieta is among those who have become experts in enlarging women's posteriors with solid silicone implants or injections of fat. And at medical meetings in the last two years, these doctors have taught the techniques to nearly 400 of their colleagues.
Many women would shudder at the thought of padding their bottoms. But certain fashions like low-rise jeans and spandex workout gear call attention to the derrière. (This spring there are even bustle panties.) And now some women have begun to fixate on their backsides.
Last year 2,361 Americans had buttock augmentation surgery, almost four times as many as in 2002, the first year that the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery kept statistics on the procedure. The operation typically costs about $20,000.
"The buttocks used to be something you hid, but now it's something you show off," said Dr. Thomas L. Roberts III, a plastic surgeon in Spartanburg, S.C., who has performed more than 300 of the procedures.
Some women over 50 get the surgery to bulk up deflating derrières, while younger patients say they want larger buttocks to complement prominent busts. "I always got compliments for my front but never for my back," said Natalie Del Rio, 18, a high school student in Miami who had the procedure last month with Dr. Mendieta. "Now my mom says I look like a Coca-Cola bottle."
Compared with breast implants and face lifts, buttock augmentation is in its infancy. Surgeons are still perfecting their techniques. And although many patients know what looks good to them -- Dr. Roberts said they often arrive in his office with magazine photos of Beyoncé Knowles or Serena Williams -- doctors do not agree on what constitutes ideal buttocks.
Efforts to enhance the size of the posterior date to ancient Greece, when Spartan women performed a bottom-kicking dance, said Dr. V. Leroy Young, a plastic surgeon in St. Louis who is chairman of the emerging trends task force of the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery. "Women would kick themselves in the fanny to make themselves bigger and firmer."
The word callipygian, meaning having a shapely rear, comes from the Greek kallipygos. Modern gluteal enhancement began in the 1950's when surgeons in Brazil and Mexico tried transferring fat cut from the abdomen. But much of this transplanted fat was absorbed. In the 1970's surgeons used breast implants in the bottom, but they did not look natural, Dr. Young said.
In the 1980's and 90's surgeons experimented with rounded silicone implants specially made for the buttocks. But the incisions often broke open and became infected, and patients didn't like the way the solid implants felt.
Finally, in the late 1990's, Dr. Roberts adapted a fat-grafting procedure originally designed for the face. In this technique, fat is removed from the stomach and thighs via liposuction, mixed with antibiotics and purified. Then thousands of fat droplets are injected one by one, so the fat can be contoured to mimic flesh and muscles.
"It's like sculpting with clay," Dr. Roberts said. "You are trying to create a shape tailored to each individual patient and a fullness of the outer buttock that you can't get with implants."
The transplanted droplets are thought to establish a new blood supply more easily than a mass of fat tissue could, theoretically allowing the fat to survive in its new location for years. Sixty to eighty percent of the fat stays where it is injected, Dr. Roberts said, and the rest is absorbed.
Each augmentation takes six to eight hours, Dr. Roberts said, and typically one to two pounds of fat are added to each side. Skinny patients are asked to gain 10 to 15 pounds before the procedure to create enough fat to work with, Dr. Roberts said.
For several weeks after their surgery, patients are not to sit down or lie on their backs lest they damage the fragile fat. They must also wear a surgical girdle to help the abdomen and thighs contract. Patients say they don't mind the discomfort. Dr. Roberts performed augmentation surgery in 2004 on Frances Foster, 63, a retiree who lives in northern Virginia. "Before I had the procedure, I had a nice bust line, but I didn't have much booty or whatever they call it today," Ms. Foster said. "It was totally flat back there."
"Now it's rounder and fuller," she said. "I'm thrilled."
Fat grafting to the buttocks is such a new procedure that little is known about how safe it is, how well it works or how long it lasts.
The most frequent complication is infection, which occurs in 2 to 3 of every 100 patients, Dr. Roberts said. Other surgeons have reported tissue necrosis, in which the fat dies and must be removed. Patients also may have scars at the injection sites that fade over time. As in all liposuction, there is a small risk that fat drops or blood clots will migrate to the lungs, causing respiratory problems and even death.
What exactly constitutes good-looking glutei? Two Mexican plastic surgeons, Dr. Ramón Cuenca-Guerra and Dr. Jorge Quezada, examined 132 patients and more than 1,000 photos and concluded that a beautiful bottom has four features: slight hollows on each side, a curved fold where the buttocks meet the thighs, a V-shape crease that looks like cleavage at the top and two dimples in the lower back. Dr. Mendieta also examined hundreds of photos but came to a different conclusion: that the overall shape of the buttocks is most important. He proposed that female buttocks come in four basic configurations: square, round, V-shape and A-shape.
"The prettiest buttocks look like A's, like upside-down hearts with a wider bottom than top," Dr. Mendieta said.
Dr. Roberts argued that each ethnic group has its own standard of beauty. Asian patients look for small, shapely buttocks, he said, while Caucasian patients are after either "voluptuous Playboy bottoms" or the "athletic, tiny" rear. Hispanic patients want full round buttocks, Dr. Roberts said, while African-American and Afro-Caribbean patients often ask him for "as big a buttocks as will fit their bodies."
Dr. Young said buttock augmentation may turn out to be, like 19th-century bustles, a passing fashion. But others say it may have staying power.
"In primeval days the butt was the primary sexual attractor, not the breasts," said Galdino F. Pranzarone, a professor of psychology at Roanoke College in Salem, Va. "This is really a return to what cave men were originally interested in."
