MEDIA; Could It Be? 'The Apprentice,' Iraqi-Style?
He may not seem like a revolutionary, but Mohammed Gohar is hoping to play a part in the transformation of Iraq's airwaves.
Mr. Gohar, the 52-year-old founder and chief executive of Video Cairo Sat, an Egyptian production company, is the driving force behind Nahrain, a new Baghdad-based television channel that hopes to start broadcasting later this month to millions of Iraqis whose primary news for decades was the strictly controlled dispatches of Saddam Hussein's government. Among Mr. Gohar's ideas for the channel: an originally produced soap opera and even a reality show.
''Under Saddam, the media was a means for the government to send its message to the people,'' he said recently by telephone from his Cairo office. ''Now, we have the means to help the people to get their message to the government.''
Private television broadcasters have been quietly springing up all over Iraq in the last year and now number around a dozen. Most are licensed -- either by the former American-led coalition or Iraq's new interim government -- but they remain loosely regulated. Many are also being founded and financed by the country's various ethnic or religious factions, raising concerns among government officials that they are being used to serve the political interests of their benefactors.
Nahrain, Mr. Gohar insists, is different. ''We have no agenda,'' he said. ''We just want to inform and entertain and basically to help people to cope with their daily lives.''
Iraq's broadcasting scene has undergone a breathtaking transformation in the last year and a half. Under the previous government, owning a satellite dish was illegal, and Iraqis caught with one were subject to six months in prison and a stiff fine. Today, roughly a third of Iraqi households own satellite dishes. There are more than 90 television and radio stations available in Iraq, according to BBC Monitoring World Media, an arm of the British Broadcasting Corporation.
Many, such as the pan-Arab channels Al Jazeera and Al Arabia, are commercial stations broadcast from abroad and only available by satellite. The most widely available free-to-air station is Al Iraqia, which was set up in 2003 by the American-led coalition government.
Nahrain, which means ''rivers'' in Arabic, is being financed by an initial $25 million investment from Naguib Sawiris, chief executive of Orascom, an Egyptian telecommunications group. (Orascom also owns Iraq's main wireless operator, Iraqna.) Nahrain's offices in Baghdad employ about 80 people, all of them Iraqi nationals.
''We went out recruiting and found a lot of talented Iraqis -- Sunnis, Shias, Kurds, everything,'' said Mr. Gohar, whose 30-year career includes stints as the personal photographer for President Anwar Sadat of Egypt and as a cameraman for the American network NBC.
While Mr. Gohar said he hoped that Iraqis would embrace Nahrain as an alternative to more partisan channels, it was also intended as a commercial venture. The network expects to carry up to 80 minutes a day of advertising, although he conceded that selling ads in a country whose economy has been largely crippled by war is a challenge. ''We are not expecting much revenue in the first year,'' he said.
Maintaining independence will be crucial for Nahrain to win credibility with the Iraqi public and to secure the confidence of prospective advertisers, media analysts said.
''We are now seeing a great boost in the number of media outlets in Iraq that are going to be competing for audiences,'' said Hussein Amin, chairman of the department of mass communications at the American University in Cairo. ''That is good in lots of ways, but the more I learn about what is really happening in Iraq, I am concerned that some of the media are becoming tools in the hands of people who misuse it. If it goes rapidly in the way that it is now, that could cause problems in the future.''
On Aug. 7, Iraq's prime minister, Ayad Allawi, ordered the Baghdad bureau of Al Jazeera to close for a month. Dr. Allawi said that Al Jazeera's coverage of kidnappings and its showing of inflammatory videotapes submitted by militant groups had become a threat to public order.
Mr. Gohar was also critical of what he said was Al Jazeera's excessive focus on the upheaval in Iraq. ''We do not view Iraq as a source of violence to bring in a bigger audience,'' he said.
Mr. Gohar said that he hoped Nahrain, by steering clear of inflammatory content, could remain above the fray. While its 10-hour daily programming schedule includes ample doses of news and public-affairs content, the programs are interspersed with musical variety shows, cartoons and Arabic sitcoms.
Nahrain's marquee program will be a midday talk show called ''Baghdad Today,'' a two-hour segment of news, interviews and features modeled after American morning shows ''Good Morning America'' and ''Today.'' The dinner-hour slot will be devoted to ''Talk of the Hour,'' a one-hour news and call-in program with Hassan Abu El Ela, a former BBC radio host and Nahrain's editorial director. The late evening will be reserved for feature films, some from Video Cairo Sat's library of mainly Egyptian movies.
Other regular segments will include a 20-minute daily show called ''Talk to America.'' According to program notes for the show, Nahrain staff will take to the streets of Baghdad and record Iraqis voicing their concerns and posing questions about the United States's presence in Iraq. Responses will then be solicited from American government and military representatives.
''Iraq has so many things to show, more than just who killed who today,'' he said. ''War is a part of Iraqi life, but not the other way around.''
