Multimedia
Highlights

Credit Christopher Miller for The New York Times.

  Our Favorite Photos of 2017 
 You can’t visit every destination. But our photographers often offer the next-best thing to being there. 
 
 
 

Credit Kevin Tachman

  Our Favorite Images from the Paris Men’s Shows 
 Thom Browne’s school-themed tundra, giant masks at Comme des Garçons — and more. 
 
 

Credit Daniel Krieger for The New York Times

 Restaurant Review
  Can Fancy Chefs Excel at Fast, Cheap Food? Two Case Studies 
 Mark Ladner’s Pasta Flyer and Nick Anderer’s Martina aim for everyday Italian cuisine that’s actually about the food. 
 
 

Credit Leah Millis/Reuters

  Women’s Marches Across the World, in Photos and Voices of Protest 
 On the one-year anniversary of the women’s marches that protested President Trump’s election, #MeToo was also a common theme among those who participated in 2018. 
 
 

Credit The New York Times

  Voices From the Women’s Marches  
 Marking the anniversary of the Women’s March in January 2017, hundreds of thousands of people gathered in major cities and small towns around the globe over the weekend, marching for women’s rights from Cheyenne, Wyo., to Pikeville, Ky., to Washington to Rome on Saturday and from Paris to London to Las Vegas, Nev. on Sunday. Photographers went to rallies for The New York Times and asked marchers what their hopes were for 2018. 
 
 
 Hungry City
 

Credit Yana Paskova for The New York Times

  At Cafe Booqoo, New Orleans Favorites, Spicy and Sweet 
 Matt Pace, who grew up in New Orleans East, prepares beignets, jambalaya, gumbo and, of course, po’ boys at his Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn, cafe.
 
 
 Living In
 

Credit Tony Cenicola/The New York Times

  Hackensack, N.J.: Small, Ethnically Diverse and Affordable 
 A less expensive alternative to many New York City suburbs, Hackensack is building additional housing in an effort to attract millennials.
 
 

Credit The New York Times

  Don Hogan Charles, Lauded Photographer of Civil Rights Era, Dies at 79 
 Mr. Charles, the first black photographer to be hired by The New York Times, took pictures of Malcolm X, Coretta Scott King and Muhammad Ali.
