Release of McCain's Medical Records Provides Unusually Broad Psychological Profile
In releasing 1,500 pages of medical and psychiatric records, Senator John McCain of Arizona has provided an unusually large amount of such material for a candidate for high office, including the broadest look ever given the public at the psychological profile of a presidential candidate.
The reason his file is so extensive is that Mr. McCain, a Navy pilot whose jet was shot down over North Vietnam, was treated for major fractures and other injuries during more than five years as a prisoner of war and received the standard psychological evaluations that were given to all P.O.W.'s after their release.
Mr. McCain's campaign carefully controlled the release of the records in what appeared to be an effort in part to counter discussions of whether Mr. McCain, a Republican, has the temperament to be president.
The campaign released a statement by Dr. Michael M. Ambrose, director of the Robert E. Mitchell Center for Prisoner of War Studies, and Dr. Jeffrey L. Moore, a clinical neuropsychologist at the center, that said: ''Senator McCain has never been diagnosed with or treated at the center for a psychological or psychiatric disorder. He has been subject to an extensive battery of psychological tests and following his last examination in 1993, we judged him to be in good physical and mental health.''
Dr. John D. Eckstein of Scottsdale, Ariz., who has cared for Mr. McCain since 1992, said he has found the senator ''to be in excellent health.''
The medical records have provided a profile of the psychological dynamics of a young officer, prisoner of war and career politician and how his personality had developed under these stresses.
Nevertheless, the picture is incomplete because The New York Times was not allowed to read the records until today and has not yet completed its review.
The campaign did not allow any pages to be photocopied. The McCain campaign selectively allowed some news organizations to examine the records before others.
In one of the first examinations after his release from captivity in 1973, Dr. P. F. O'Connell, a Navy physician, said Mr. McCain ''has adjusted exceptionally well to repatriation'' and had ''an ambitious, striving, successful pattern of adjustment.'' Dr. O'Connell wrote that psychological tests were normal and confirmed his impression.
Ten years later, an assessment found Mr. McCain to be friendly and cooperative. He received high marks for being alert, energetic, warm, spontaneous and flexible, having concern for others and a sense of humor.
During his captivity, when Mr. McCain was held in solitary confinement for three years, interrogated repeatedly, beaten and suffered fractures, he relied on his faith in the United States, the Navy and God, he told doctors after his release.
''Through long periods of solitary he kept his mind occupied by recalling details of old movies, philosophy and books,'' the doctors wrote. Mr. McCain said he had strayed pretty ''far out'' and had referred to it as ''mentally deteriorating.''
The doctors said ''he explained this partially by saying that he always heard the guards with his food, for example, but was often so much in his private world, that he strongly resented their coming around and bringing him back to reality by intruding. He was enjoying his fantasies so much. Apparently, however, there was never any serious problem returning to reality when required.''
Mr. McCain played down ''the extensive pain he endured mentioning that the mind seems to forget it,'' Dr. O'Connell said. ''He gives credit to others for saving his life and ministering to him, describing this in a quiet, unostentatious manner.''
Mr. McCain, whose father and grandfathers had been admirals, refused offers of an early release in March 1968 when he realized the propaganda importance his captors placed on him.
''Ever since realizing that he was the son of a famous, highly successful naval officer, and although proud of his father,'' Dr. O'Connell wrote, ''he has been preoccupied with escaping being in the shadow of his father and establishing his own image and identity in the eyes of others.''
''He feels his experiences and performance as a P.O.W. have finally permitted this to happen,'' Dr. O'Connell continued. ''It was with a smile of fulfillment and relief and a wink at this father that he enjoyed hearing his father being introduced at a public dinner as 'Commander McCain's father.' He had arrived.''
Dr. O'Connell also wrote that Mr. McCain ''felt that he had profited by his experience and had changed significantly'' and ''learned more about himself, about others.'' Mr. McCain also felt that his values had been tested, the doctor wrote, and was reassured that he had met the challenge, and that he had finally escaped the image of his father.
Mr. McCain also learned to control his temper and not to become angry over insignificant things, the doctors said.
As a boy, Mr. McCain was described as quiet, interested in sports and close to his mother in part because his father was at sea for long periods. ''The first whisper of rebellion, mild, came at puberty over hair length,'' the records said.
Mr. McCain's enrollment in the Naval Academy was ''a foregone conclusion'' as a third generation Navy man, the records said. But ''I was a rebel without a cause,'' Mr. McCain told the doctors.
''He resented and fought the system, but never to the point of being expelled,'' and ''he accumulated many demerits, got along poorly with a despised company officer, was low in grease, and managed only the lowest midshipman rank his senior year.''
