‘Cat People’ and a Gallery of Horror Predators
Simone Simon in “Cat People” (1942), directed by Jacques Tourneur. Credit The Criterion Collection

Over the course of his brief career, the Russian-born producer Val Lewton (1904-1951) pioneered a new sort of horror movie. Shock ran second to atmosphere. The supernatural was a function of the psychological.
Lewton’s best-known movie, “Cat People” (1942), begins with a quote that glosses Freud’s view of religion: “Even as fog continues to lie in the valleys, so does ancient sin cling to the low places, the depressions in the world consciousness.” The quote is attributed to the movie’s resident psychiatrist, Dr. Louis Judd, the author of a book, “The Anatomy of Atavism,” and refers to the protagonist’s belief that her aroused passions transform her into a feral cat.
Reissued by Criterion in a digital restoration, “Cat People” was the first Lewton production. Impressed by Universal’s recent success with “The Wolf Man” (1941), his studio, RKO, assigned him a title along with a modest budget. The result, directed by Jacques Tourneur, was smart, literate and economical, establishing the gold standard for a particular kind of B-movie. It was also a hit with audiences.
The cheerful, staid Oliver Reed (Kent Smith) picks up the strange, enchanting Irena Dubrovna (Simone Simon), a recent refugee from Serbia whom he finds sketching a panther at the Central Park Zoo. They date, and, despite her superstitious belief that she harbors “something evil,” they eventually wed.
When Irena’s fears prevent them from consummating their marriage, Oliver turns first for advice to the psychiatrist Dr. Judd (Tom Conway) and then, for emotional comfort, to his work buddy Alice (Jane Randolph), an all-American type, as normal as he. Shamed and abandoned, Irena begins to disintegrate — or, to put it another way, to experience her inner feline predator.
While gripped with sexual repression, Irena carries another burden: She is obsessed with the history of her nation, imagined as a primeval curse. (Earlier versions of DeWitt Bodeen’s screenplay included scenes of Nazi occupation.) Irena cannot escape her past, and she contaminates the optimistic Americans with whom she comes in contact. In the buildup to their agonizing breakup, Oliver blames her for teaching him “unhappiness.” Alice, the healthy homewrecker, is mortally afraid of Irena; the rational, overconfident Dr. Judd should be.
Despite their lurid titles (“I Walked With a Zombie,” “Bedlam”) and advertisements, Lewton productions were subtle. Horror was predicated on the power of suggestion. A scene in which Irena plays with a caged bird and inadvertently causes it to die of fright, or one where, dining with Oliver and his friends at a cheery boîte called the Belgrade, she is spooked by a feline older woman who addresses her in Serbian as “sister,” are more unsettling than the movie’s conventional scares.
Lewton’s major special effect was cutting. He inherited two editors, Mark Robson (who worked on “Cat People”) and Robert Wise, who had worked at RKO with Orson Welles, and eventually converted them into directors. Kent Jones’s 2008 documentary feature, “Val Lewton: The Man in the Shadows,” included as an extra, notes that the most intense moments in Lewton-produced films are only a few seconds in length. Well edited itself, Mr. Jones’s intelligent, affecting documentary uses clips to suggest an affinity between Lewton’s films and those of Jean Cocteau; the deployment of empty space in Lewton productions is similarly akin to Surrealist paintings in the projection of an uncanny imminence.
Unlike his films, the appreciation of Lewton’s artistry requires no suspension of disbelief. (Earlier iterations of “Cat People” are available for streaming on Amazon Video.)
The six-film, three-DVD set “Hollywood Legends of Horror” (Warner Archive, repackaging movies previously available as twofers) gives some idea of routine pre-Lewton horror: star-driven, intermittently humorous and often hokey, if not without a certain poetry.
“Doctor X” (1932), directed by Michael Curtiz, is notable for its muted two-strip Technicolor and Lee Tracy’s comic performance as a persistent reporter. “The Return of Doctor X” (1939), directed by Vincent Sherman, is more of a curiosity, featuring Humphrey Bogart as a scientist with a corpselike affect and white streak in his hair.
Those are the only Warner Bros. features; the rest are from MGM, two directed by Tod Browning. “Mark of the Vampire” (1935), a remake of Browning’s 1927 silent “London After Midnight,” is distinguished by its lush gothic mise-en-scène. (James Wong Howe was the cinematographer.) More entertaining, “The Devil-Doll” (1936) stars Lionel Barrymore, frequently in drag, as a banker escaped from Devil’s Island to wreak vengeance on his former partners with the help of some cunningly miniaturized assassins.
Closest to a classic is Karl Freund’s “Mad Love” (1935), based on a story previously filmed by Robert Wiene in Austria in 1924. Peter Lorre makes his Hollywood debut playing an insane surgeon obsessed with an actress he has discovered at the Grand Guignol. (The movie flopped but left its mark. Under its Spanish title, it figures in the Malcolm Lowry novel “Under the Volcano”; the critic Pauline Kael saw it as an influence on “Citizen Kane.”)
Lorre’s mad doctor notwithstanding, the most frightening film is “The Mask of Fu Manchu” (1932). Rivaling D. W. Griffith’s “The Birth of a Nation” in the pathology of its racially driven sexual paranoia, the movie was produced by William Randolph Hearst, whose newspapers often warned of “the yellow peril.” Given the campy gusto with which Boris Karloff plays the titular monster of depravity, it would be pleasant to think that he and his Liverpool-born director, Charles Brabin, were satirizing, rather than dramatizing, the xenophobic mythology of British imperialism.
NEWLY RELEASED

Photo

BLOOD BATH Shot in Yugoslavia with English-speaking stars, this mid-1960s vampire film, made under the auspices of Roger Corman, has one of the most convoluted production stories in movie history — recut multiple times by a number of directors. All four versions are included on two Blu-rays, along with interviews, a visual essay and a 38-page booklet. (Arrow)
BODY SNATCHERS Abel Ferrara directed the second remake of Don Siegel’s 1956 classic, integrating elements of the first remake, directed by Phil Kaufman in 1978. Released in 1993 and new on Blu-ray, Mr. Ferrara’s version adds a new layer of paranoia but sets the familiar tale of alien mind control on a military base. (Warner Archive)

Photo

GHOSTBUSTERS Melissa McCarthy, Kristen Wiig, Kate McKinnon and Leslie Jones replace Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Harold Ramis and Ernie Hudson in the 2016 update of the 1984 original. In her review for The New York Times in July, Manohla Dargis called it “that rarest of big-studio offerings — a movie that is a lot of enjoyable, disposable fun.” Available on Blu-ray, DVD and Amazon Video. (Columbia Pictures)

Photo

HAUNTED HONEYMOON Gene Wilder directed — and plays an extravagantly neurotic actor opposite his wife at the time, Gilda Radner — in this 1986 farce. “Humor and horror make an uneasy combination,” the New York Times critic Walter Goodman wrote. On Blu-ray and DVD. (Kino Lorber)
RAISING CAIN Brian De Palma parodied himself to splendid effect in his baroque psychological thriller from 1992. Reviewing it for The Times, Janet Maslin called the movie “a delirious thriller” and wrote of Mr. De Palma that “working with an exhilarating sense of freedom, he seems to care not in the least what any of it really means.” On Blu-ray, DVD and Amazon Video. (Scream)
A version of this article appears in print on October 30, 2016, on Page AR19 of the New York edition with the headline: Cat Scratch Fever.
