Elian - CNN
CNN Films
CNN Films brings distinguished, thought-provoking documentary programming to audiences on CNN's platforms around the world.

'Holy Hell'
"Holy Hell" reveals an intimate, never-before-seen world inside Buddhafield, a mysterious spiritual sect that filmmaker Will Allen joined and became its unofficial documentarian for 22 years. Premieres Thursday, Sept. 1, at 9 p.m. ET on CNN.

Unraveling the myth 
Bold. Brutal. Brilliant. CNN unravels the larger-than-life myth behind Steve Jobs. 

Meet the man who invented BASE jumping
Sunshine Superman is the immersive love story of Carl and Jean Boenish, the couple who invented BASE jumping in the 1970s and '80s. 

The Hunting Ground
The feature documentary about sexual assault on American college campuses -- the failure of universities to address the problem, and the rise of a new student movement. Original song "Til It Happens To You" by Lady Gaga nominated for an Oscar.

Glen Campbell ... I'll Be Me
A beautiful, funny, inspiring film about music superstar Glen Campbell's struggle with Alzheimer's disease before and throughout his sold-out "Goodbye Tour."

Fresh Dressed
The influence of fashion in hip-hop culture. Featuring Kanye West, Pharrell Williams, Sean "Puffy" Combs, Nas, Pusha T and many others.

Evocateur: The Morton Downey Jr. Movie
Before Jerry Springer and Glenn Beck, there was Morton Downey Jr., "the king of shock TV."

Lady Valor: The Kristin Beck Story
Despite 20 years as a U.S. Navy SEAL, Kristin Beck says her struggle for acceptance as a transgender American represents her most difficult mission.

Life Itself
When Roger Ebert died in 2013 after battling cancer, he was arguably the world's most famous film critic. "Life Itself" is a revealing documentary based on Ebert's memoir.

Dinosaur 13
CNN Films' "Dinosaur 13" documents the discovery of the most complete Tyrannosaurus Rex fossil ever found -- and the incredible legal battle to determine who owned it. 

Ivory Tower
"Ivory Tower" questions the cost, value and methods of America's higher education system. The documentary explores a potential crisis that could touch an entire generation of young Americans.

Whitey: US v. James J. Bulger
"Whitey: US v. James J. Bulger" details the capture and conviction of the notorious Boston gangster James "Whitey" Bulger.

Documented
Explore the journey of undocumented immigrant and Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Jose Antonio Vargas. 

Sole Survivor
Only a handful of people have come through major plane crashes alive and alone. CNN Films' "Sole Survivors" examines four of those stories: The toddler, the "Miracle Girl," the co-pilot and the seeker. They survived when no one else did.

An Unreal Dream
Michael Morton, who spent 25 years in prison after he was wrongly convicted in his wife's murder, says he forgives a prosecutor who failed to share evidence in his trial.

Blackfish
Blackfish traces a 39-year history of killer whales in captivity leading up to the 2010 killing of Sea World trainer Dawn Brancheau by the 12,000-pound orca, Tilikum, a whale previously associated with the death of two other people.

Pandora's Promise
Through the intensely personal stories of environmental thinkers, "Pandora's Promise" reveals a rift within the environmental movement as they describe their individual journeys of "defection," in the debate over how to manage climate change.
