Clinton's 'Pile-On Politics'
Supported by

Updated Nearly three days after the Democratic debate Tuesday night, Senator Hillary Clinton’s post-forum tactics — complete with her video titled “The Politics of Pile On” and her remarks about the all-men’s club of politics — have reverberated with more buzz and backlash than her much-criticized performance in Philadelphia.
On NBC’s “Today” show, Senator Barack Obama was the latest to weigh in this morning — when asked by one of the show’s hosts, Matt Lauer, about her campaign’s post-debate strategy. (Note his line that’s almost akin to the take by some that Senator Clinton sounds like she’s started singing that refrain, “Why is Everybody Always Picking on Me?”)
 
 Mr. Lauer: Let’s start where Andrea left off, this idea that when the guys challenge the gal at this debate this week, that in some ways you were ganging up on her, and you heard what Senator Clinton said at Wellesley yesterday. She said that in some ways, that all-women’s college prepared her for the all boys club of presidential politics. It sounds to me, Senator, that I just heard the gender card drop. How are you going to deal with it?
Mr. Obama: Well, look, I am assuming, and I hope that Senator Clinton wants to be treated like everybody else, and I think that that’s why she’s running for President. You know, when we had a debate back in Iowa a while back, we spent I think the first 15 minutes of the debate hitting me on various foreign policy issues. I didn’t come out and say, look, I’m being hit on because I look different from the rest of the folks on the stage. I assumed it was because there were real policy differences there. And I think that has to be the attitude that all of us take. We’re not running for the president of the city council, we’re running for the presidency of the United States of America. 
Mr: Lauer: So you don’t feel as though you have to be sensitive at all to this gender issue, that if you do vigorously challenge Senator Clinton that it might take on a more perilous tone than if you vigorously challenge a male candidate? 
Mr. Obama: No, look, I don’t think that people doubt that Senator Clinton is tough. She’s used to playing in national politics. And in fact, that is one of the things that she has suggested why she should be elected is because she’s been playing in this rough-and-tumble stage. So it doesn’t make sense for her after having run that way for eight months, the first time that people start challenging her point of view, that suddenly, she backs off and says: Don’t pick on me. I think that that is not obviously how we would expect her to operate if she were president. 
Here’s her original “pile-on” video: 
To be fair to her Democratic rivals, few, if any, of their answers attacked her personally. Senator Chris Dodd and Mr. Obama have discussed the electability factor, given the polarized history that marked her husband’s administration. And, in a previous debate, Mr. Dodd also remarked that her failed health care initiative in the 1990s set back reform on that issue for more than a decade. He and others have been fairly deferential, or perhaps respectful in their criticisms of her positions. 
So, given her campaign’s response to her rivals’ debate remarks, you can almost imagine the pile-on White House defense if, say, for example, Senator Clinton as president faced withering criticisms from foreign (mainly male) leaders. 
Or, as Ruth Marcus wrote in her Washington Post column today about fallout from the campaign’s approach:
Please. The Philadelphia debate was not exactly a mob moment to trigger the Violence Against Women Act; if anything, this has been an overly (pardon the phrase) gentlemanly campaign to date. Those other guys were beating up on Clinton, if you can call that beating up, because she is the strong front-runner, not because she is a weak woman. 
And a candidate as strong as Clinton doesn’t need to play the woman-as-victim card, not even in “the all-boys club of presidential politics,” as Clinton called it in a speech yesterday at her all-women alma mater, Wellesley College. I have a pretty good nose for sexism, and what I detected in the air from Philadelphia was not sexism but the desperation of candidates confronting a front-runner who happens to be a woman. 
She called Senator Clinton’s use of the gender card a setback for women.
The question is, is it? It’s certainly distracted a bit from the criticisms that Mrs. Clinton’s debate answers were less than direct, and from the controversy over her sealed papers at the Clinton library and the Spitzer license policy  for immigrants.
And her campaign has also employed another tried-and-true tack, summoning up donors and female supporters to fight back against the otherwise male-dominated field. (Remember fund-raising appeals responding to stories about a little cleavage or the bad-hair days?) The week also marks another startup of her courting of young and female voters, so joking around about the all-boys club of politics won’t necessarily hurt her with that crowd. That’s just a truism.
As The Times’s Elisabeth Bumiller reported from the senator’s appearance at her alma mater, Wellesley, Senator Clinton has considerable support among women in a recent CBS poll. That’s especially true among Democratic women and women who identify themselves as independents, according to Marjorie Connelly, one of our polling experts.
But how will this go down in the general election? The same CBS poll from mid-October showed that 71 percent of Republican women, and 80 percent of Republican men, view her unfavorably. And independents still contain an undecided segment.
Will she turn off a section of potential crossover voters — especially men — with this approach? Is she grinding the heel of her pumps into their toes unnecessarily?
(Brief Update: The Republican National Committee also released a Web video, posted on YouTube, of Senator Clinton’s debate answers. And Democratic candidate John Edwards issued his own, calling it “The Politics of Parsing,” which our Christine Hauser has posted today.) 
[Update: 3:30 p.m. In New Hampshire today, Senator Clinton addressed questions about her rivals’ take and the gender issue. According to the wires, she said: ” I don’t think they’re piling on because I’m a woman, I think they’re piling on because I’m winning.” Check the double use of “piling on.” Do we get it enough?]
And does this pile-on claim undercut, as Ms. Marcus and others have highlighted, her intent to portray herself as solid, take-no-prisoners commander-in-chief? It’s too soon to tell, we suppose. 
Many of these questions have been rippling around the blogs. And Slate.com offered up a great roundup of that commentary yesterday.
In addition, so many political correspondents — beginning with our own Adam Nagourney — have invoked the Rick Lazio moment from his debate with her during her first Senate campaign in 2000, when he walked across the stage and thrust a paper with a no-soft-money pledge into her space.
We remember that moment, too. So we went back and looked for her response from then. One of her aides called it “menacing.” 
Mr. Lazio’s retort? “The idea that somehow that there’s a double standard because you’re a man or a woman, and you can’t make a point forcefully if you’re a man, and the person you’re making the point with is a woman, I just think that’s sexist,” he said.
But Mrs.Clinton herself had a little more fun in a far less pronounced way in those days. The day after that debate, she shrugged in a bit of a big-sister put-down by saying, “the thing that probably prepared me best in dealing with things like that was having two younger brothers.” 
The former Congressman’s charge across the stage in September of that year was equated with bullying, something that’s a far cry from the largely reasoned responses of Mrs. Clinton’s rivals on the stage the other night.
Still, we’re told it’s all gender politics, or as one of our colleagues once called it back then, hormonal politics (on both sides, folks). 
Funny how history and language keep replaying, no?
What's Next
Loading...
