Syria Demands Guarantees Before a Troop Pullback
The Syrian government put new conditions on any troop pullback on Sunday, casting new doubt on a truce that was scheduled to begin this week.
The government of President Bashar al-Assad said it now wanted “written guarantees” that rebels would stop fighting before it pulled back its troops under the cease-fire plan, which it accepted last week. The demands came as Pope Benedict XVI, in his Easter blessing at the Vatican, made a plea for peace in Syria.
The plan, drawn up by Kofi Annan, the joint envoy of the United Nations and the Arab League, requires Mr. Assad to “begin pullback of military concentrations in and around population centers” by Tuesday for a truce that would start 48 hours later.
While insisting on Sunday that the pullback would happen, a spokesman for the Syrian Foreign Ministry, Jihad Makdissi, released a statement contradicting earlier reports that Damascus had “confirmed that it will pull back its troops from and around cities on April 10,” calling those reports “a wrong explanation.”
Advertisement
The statement said that Mr. Annan “has not delivered until now written guarantees regarding the approval of terrorist armed groups to end violence and readiness to lay down” their weapons. In addition, Mr. Makdissi said, Syria has requested guarantees that Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey will stop financing the armed groups.
He said the peace plan put forward by Mr. Annan was bound to fail. “The regime will not implement this plan,” Colonel As’aad said in a telephone interview.
President Assad had given few indications that he was following through on the peace deal that his government agreed to last week. Despite the requirement that heavy weapons be withdrawn from cities and towns, there were reports again on Sunday that government forces were shelling an area in Idlib Province near Turkey, killing and injuring dozens of people, according to opposition activists. People inside Syria and along the Turkish border told the news agency that about 90 tanks and armored vehicles, backed by helicopters, had bombarded a plain southwest of Idlib city.
Government troops reportedly surrounded fighters from the Free Syrian Army in Al Bashiriya, one of about 40 area villages.
Mr. Annan said on Sunday that the “unacceptable” escalation in violence violated guarantees made to him, and he called on the government to keep its promises to end the bloodshed.
A version of this article appears in print on April 9, 2012, on Page A8 of the New York edition with the headline: Cease-Fire in Doubt as Syria Demands New Conditions. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
