For Now, Bernie Sanders’s Health Plan Is More of a Tax Plan
The Upshot
If you read the news articles over the weekend about Senator Bernie Sanders’s new single-payer health reform plan, you might have thought you were reading about tax policy, not health care.
That’s because the plan, released two hours before Sunday night’s Democratic debate, was full of details about the taxes that would be collected to finance it. The plan would charge a special income tax, called a premium, increase payroll taxes and raise a variety of taxes on high-income Americans, including income and capital gains taxes. Those are big, specific changes, worthy of detailed coverage.
Missing, however, were more than a few sentences about how the proposal would change the health care system in the United States.
Mr. Sanders wants what is called a single-payer program, a major change to our current system. The health care policy described by his white paper would replace all health insurance programs in the United States with coverage for everyone in the country provided by the federal government, the single payer. Large, new categories of services would be covered, including dental and nursing home care. It would eliminate co-payments and deductibles.
Mr. Sanders has branded the program as “Medicare for all.” But the program he describes isn’t an extension of the existing Medicare program, which provides health insurance for older people and the disabled. Medicare includes premiums, co-payments and deductibles, and excludes coverage for long-term care or dentistry.
A lot of important details have been left out. Here are some things it doesn’t say: What would the new system pay doctors and hospitals for their services? How would it decide which medical treatments it should and shouldn’t cover? What strategies would it use to contain health care costs and keep the system affordable? Who would make the decisions, big and small, about how the program would work?
I spoke with Gerald Friedman, a professor of economics at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, who provided the campaign with estimates of the program’s cost. Mr. Friedman sent detailed tables explaining his calculations. He assumes that spending in some categories of health care would go up, as more Americans can afford access. Others, he said, would drop because the single-payer system would give the federal government improved bargaining power and lower administrative costs. On balance, he estimates that the single-payer system would cost the country less over time than the existing health care system.

Bernie Sanders at the Democratic debate on Sunday. Credit Travis Dove for The New York Times

Mr. Friedman calculates, for example, that the cost of physician services in a single-payer system could be lowered by 10.7 percent — his estimate of how much doctors currently spend on billing and administration staff that they would no longer need. I asked him how the payer would get to that number — would the government pay lower prices for treatments, or change which treatments it paid for, or switch doctors to a system in which they earn government salaries?
He couldn’t say with certainty. “The pleasure of being an academic is I can just spell things out and leave the details to others,” he said. “The details very quickly get very messy.”
That doesn’t preclude a single-payer system that could be devised to hit the estimates provided by the campaign. Many other countries run single-payer health care systems that provide more health care coverage than the United States while costing far less. Mr. Friedman’s estimates don’t suggest that the United States could cut its health care bill in half, making it similar in size to the French system. He instead finds more modest savings that could come from lowered administrative costs and better prices on prescription drugs.
But the absence of the “very messy” details in the Sanders plan is telling. He wants to make major reforms to the health care system, and those changes will come with costs and uncertainties. Enacting his plan could make health care more affordable and less complicated for many Americans, especially those earning low incomes. But it would require wrenching, disruptive change. As Hillary Clinton and her surrogates have noted, the plan would involve eliminating Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program. It would also eliminate Obamacare marketplaces and the private health insurance that most American receive from their employers. Despite its name, it would make substantial changes to Medicare.
Mrs. Clinton’s discussion of those losses has been somewhat disingenuous — Mr. Sanders is offering people who lose such plans something new and probably more generous to replace them. But her critique highlights the political risks of a major overhaul. Obamacare forced meaningful changes to the health insurance plans of a very small minority of Americans, but remains unpopular. The Sanders plan would change how health care is financed for nearly every American.
When it comes to the details, the Sanders campaign finds itself in a similar position to the field of Republican presidential candidates who have vowed to “repeal and replace” Obamacare. Donald Trump has said he’d replace Obamacare with “something terrific.” Marco Rubio’s health care plan is exactly the length of a newspaper op-ed. The campaign of Ted Cruz, who helped shut down the government over Obamacare repeal, has issued no formal health care plan at all.
Mrs. Clinton has released a detailed plan, but it’s much more modest in its ambitions, since it would tinker at the edges of Obamacare’s reforms.
It’s easy to rail against the country’s existing health care system, which is expensive, inequitable and complex. It’s harder to devise a detailed replacement that’s workable, affordable and politically popular.
The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. Sign up for our newsletter.
A version of this article appears in print on January 20, 2016, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: For Now, Sanders’s Health Plan Is More of a Tax Plan.
