Room for Debate - NYTimes.com
The Opinion Pages

national security

July 20, 2016
 Should the U.S. Pull Its Nuclear Weapons From Turkey?
 Has the upheaval there shown that our hydrogen bombs need to be kept in a more secure place?

July 15, 2016
 Can We Just “Live With” Terrorism?
 Were the French premier's words defeatist or a recognition of the need for a democracy to live freely?

January 12, 2016
 Reflecting on Obama’s Presidency 
 What have been the defining aspects of Obama's legacy as president?

September 2, 2015
 What’s the Greatest Threat to U.S. National Security?
 The president says it's nuclear terrorism. The Pentagon says it's Russia. The F.B.I. says it's the Islamic State.

May 18, 2015
 Iraq, Bad Intelligence or a Lesson in Bad Policy?
 Was Iraq a unique foreign policy disaster caused by bad intelligence or is it a warning about aggressive military action that's still …

January 12, 2015
 When Jihadists Come Home 
 How should Western governments treat their citizens who return after training with Islamic extremists?

December 21, 2014
 Do We Need the C.I.A.?
 Would the security needs of the United States be better served if the agency were dismantled?

December 19, 2013
 Has Snowden Been Vindicated?
 Do criticisms of N.S.A. programs by a presidential panel and a federal judge show that Edward Snowden is a principled whistleblower?

October 24, 2013
 If We’re Spying, Are We Still ‘Allies’?
 After surveillance revelations, Brazil, France and Germany may be having second thoughts about the U.S.: In what sense are they "allies"?

July 31, 2013
 Beyond Bradley Manning
 Will the outcome of the Manning trial have ramifications in other cases? How significant is this week's verdict?

June 25, 2013
 Where Can a Fugitive Hide?
 If you were a fugitive from the American government, where would you go? Off the grid? Or to a sympathetic anti-American regime?

June 11, 2013
 A Whistle-Blower, a Criminal or Both
 How should the government handle the case of Edward J. Snowden, who admitted disclosing secrets about N.S.A. surveillance?

June 9, 2013
 Secrecy and Freedom
 Is government surveillance a threat to our democracy?

May 21, 2013
 Obama, the Media and National Security
 Have the administration's actions against journalists in leak inquiries protected national security or violated the First Amendment?

March 19, 2013
 Was It Worth It?
 Is America better off now than it was when Saddam Hussein was in power?
About Room for Debate
In Room for Debate, The Times invites knowledgeable outside contributors to discuss news events and other timely issues. Reader comments are moderated Monday through Friday.
Suggest a Forum Idea
Room for Debate welcomes suggestions from readers: What questions should we be asking? Please e-mail us your ideas for debates, as well as experts whose insights you'd like to read.
