Obama’s Revenue Plans Hit Resistance in Congress
WASHINGTON — President Obama is running into stiff Congressional resistance to his plans to raise money for his ambitious agenda, and the resulting hole in the budget is threatening a major health care overhaul and other policy initiatives.
The administration’s central revenue proposal — limiting the value of affluent Americans’ itemized deductions, including the one for charitable giving — fell flat in Congress, leaving the White House, at least for now, without $318 billion that it wants to set aside to help cover uninsured Americans. At the same time, lawmakers of both parties have warned against moving too quickly on a plan to auction carbon emission permits to produce more than $600 billion.
The unwillingness to embrace some of the major White House tax and revenue proposals has frustrated administration officials. They note that lawmakers, many of them supporters of the president’s ambitious agenda, clamor to hold down the deficit while balking at the proposals to finance his program.
Clint Stretch, a top tax policy analyst for the consulting firm Deloitte Tax, said, “The president and the budget committees have set very ambitious targets for revenue raising, and they did it against a set of proposals that are going to be very hard to enact.”
As Congress prepares to reconvene after a recess, senior lawmakers and aides say they are only now beginning to confront the lack of new sources of money, especially for moving the nation toward universal health coverage, a goal for which Democrats hope to deliver a plan this year.
“It is a challenge,” said the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, Kent Conrad, Democrat of North Dakota. For the health care effort, “you are talking about hundreds of billions of dollars under any formulation.”
Among other setbacks for the White House, 10 Senate Democrats joined Republicans this month in pushing to protect more wealthy American families from the reach of the federal estate tax, a change that could cost the Treasury $100 billion over 10 years. Businesses and their Congressional allies are coming together to try to fend off an effort to close corporate tax loopholes.
Administration officials say they have not given up on pushing at least some elements of their original plans through Congress. Even if they cannot prevail, they say, they can find some new sources of revenue that, along with new efficiencies in care and savings in Medicare and Medicaid, will allow them to forge ahead with the health care plan.
“There are lots of different ways of skinning this cat and making the numbers work,” said Peter R. Orszag, director of the White House Office of Management and Budget.
The difficulty in winning support for tax changes in isolation has also convinced the administration that a broader rewriting of tax laws is the best approach, perhaps as soon as next year.
“All roads in the future lead to tax reform,” said Rahm Emanuel, the White House chief of staff.
In adopting a pair of budgets that House and Senate negotiators hope to reconcile in the next few weeks, Congressional Democrats put off the tough questions of how to pay for the president’s chief priorities.
But those budgets require that initiatives in health and energy be “deficit neutral” within a matter of years. That requirement, coupled with the opposition to the financing options pushed by the White House, has many lawmakers and senior aides predicting that Congress will have no choice but to take aim at taxing employer-provided health benefits, which now remain tax-free no matter how generous.
Senator Max Baucus, a Montana Democrat and chairman of the Finance Committee, has indicated that he is open to taxing some high-value coverage plans, and Mr. Conrad has said he also suspects that taxing high-end plans will ultimately have to be part of the health care equation.
But Mr. Obama campaigned against the idea of taxing health benefits when his Republican opponent, Senator John McCain of Arizona, proposed it during the presidential campaign. Just the other day Robert Gibbs, the White House press secretary, said that the president remained opposed to the idea and that it could run contrary to his pledge not to raise taxes on Americans earning less than $250,000 a year.
Any effort to dip into employer-paid health benefits, then, could put the Democratic-controlled Congress at odds with Mr. Obama or force him into a stark reversal, both unattractive options.
Given the difficulties in finding a way to pay for health care, and given the extended time that Democrats have allowed themselves before money to pay for it must catch up with the spending, Senator Judd Gregg of New Hampshire predicts that Democrats will not pay for it at all or will use gimmicks to mask the costs. “They are going to play games,” said Mr. Gregg, the senior Republican on the Budget Committee, “and ultimately they are going to add it to the deficit.”
But Democrats say they are committed to finding ways to pay for a significant health care overhaul, as well as a new energy policy and other Obama initiatives.
Administration officials say there is a tremendous amount of money to be found in savings gained through changes in health care delivery and information technology, and such savings will reduce the revenue Congress must find. “By combining Medicare and Medicaid savings and these game-changing efficiency improvements with some additional revenue,” said Mr. Orszag, the president’s budget chief, “I think a deficit-neutral health care reform is eminently doable.”
A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama’s Revenue Plans Hit Resistance in Congress.
