Primi Italian Steakhouse in West Islip: A Contender Throws a One-Two Punch
The tone at Primi Italian Steakhouse is masculine but modern enough to make women feel comfortable; this may be the rare steakhouse where the women diners outnumber the men. Credit Donna Alberico for The New York Times

With Primi Italian Steakhouse, which opened in January in West Islip, you can almost hear the marketing wheels turning: Combine two Long Island cuisine staples, call the place “first” in Italian, and success shouldn’t be too far behind.
Judging from the crowds so far, the formula is working.
There are better steakhouses and better Italian restaurants out there, but in terms of the complete dining experience, Primi is a contender. Its kitchen turns out rock-solid examples of either cuisine, and the restaurant offers a luxurious dining room and excellent service.
Primi is owned by Frank Bono, who along with Timeless Restaurant Group opened the Doppio series of restaurants in New York and Connecticut. Here he has created a restaurant that is handsome and comfortable, with plenty of polished wood and voluptuously cushioned chairs and banquettes. The tone is masculine but modern enough to make women feel comfortable; this may be the rare steakhouse where the women outnumber the men.

The Primi pizza. Credit Donna Alberico for The New York Times

The menu, overseen by chef Louis Barresi, creator of the Doppio concept, is mostly spot on. On the Italian side, we started with the decadent Primi pizza, which included fontina, ricotta and mozzarella cheeses topped with wild mushrooms, prosciutto and truffle oil. Grilled octopus seems to be this year’s trendy appetizer, and Primi’s version was very good: a thick and meaty limb is grilled and served with a five-olive purée, some fingerling potatoes and pieces of cacciatorini salami. The burrata appetizer was outstanding, the moist and creamy hunk of imported mozzarella accompanied by cherry tomatoes, prosciutto and an aged balsamic vinegar.
For entrees, we especially loved chef Barresi’s chicken scarpariello. This dish usually arrives as a heap of potatoes, peppers, sausage and bony thighs, in quantities so large even your cousin Vinny couldn’t finish it. Primi’s lighter version lets the chicken take center stage, using a boneless thigh and semi-boneless breast with just a sprinkle of spicy cherry peppers, a few ounces of fennel sausage, some slices of fingerling potatoes and a small pool of white wine sauce. It was the perfect portion, and the best item on the menu, which in a high-priced steakhouse is no small feat.
Speaking of steaks, the 38-ounce prime-aged porterhouse for two can easily feed three, though at $98 dollars it should probably be more flavorful. Ours was perfectly cooked and looked fantastic on the plate, pre-sliced and nicely charred on the outside, even when ordered rare. The meat itself, however, didn’t have the marbling required of a truly great porterhouse. “Fat is the flavor-giver for meat,” wrote James Beard, and fans of Peter Luger in Great Neck or Brooklyn, for example, might find themselves slightly let down by the flavor of Primi’s leaner offering.

The Chocolate Primi. Credit Donna Alberico for The New York Times

The bone-in rib-eye, on the other hand, was excellent. Weighing in at 26 ounces, this deliciously fatty and charred slab with its tomahawk-shaped bone will inspire plenty of Fred Flintstone jokes. It was also much more savory than the porterhouse and offered nearly as much meat, though it was considerably less expensive at $62. Add to this a side of the house Béarnaise sauce and an order of the addictive Tuscan fries, and you begin to feel like you’re in a classic American steak house. (Sadly, there’s no creamed spinach.)
For those who don’t eat red meat there is a large and very tasty tuna tartare appetizer, tossed with capers and diced cucumbers. Also good was an entree of pan-roasted branzino, the skin-on fillet served with a hazelnut caponata and parsnip purée. And of course there is a nice selection of pastas, including the simple but often mishandled bucatini cacio e pepe (cheese and pepper), which here featured an aged pecorino and handmade pasta.
For dessert Primi offers large, satisfying versions of Italian classics, built for sharing. The tiramisù, for example, was moist and fluffy, and something called the Chocolate Primi was a killer combination of chocolate mousse, ganache and raspberry sauce. It is also worth noting how good the barista service is at Primi. Espressos are served with a perfect crema, the hallmark of great Italian coffee.
None of this is cheap, however; Primi can lighten the wallet in a hurry. But there’s no denying that this a first-class luxury restaurant that gets nearly everything right.
Primi Italian Steakhouse
999 Montauk Highway 
West Islip
631-526-9779
primiitalian.com
Very Good
The Space Luxurious dining room with plush chairs and banquettes and well-spaced seating. There is also a small lounge area with a fireplace for after-dinner drinks. The restaurant seats 140. Wheelchair accessible.
The Crowd Families and local professionals. There were no children on the nights we visited, and it may be that brunch is the best time to bring them. Service is excellent.
The Bar Striking 20-seat bar with a top of Carrara marble. There are about 100 wines by the bottle, $40 to $500, and 20 wines by the glass, $10 to $16. Three beers are on tap, $7 to $8.50; eight by the bottle, $6 to $9.
The Bill Appetizers, $13 to $24. Entrees, $21 to $45. Sides, $10 to $12. There is a $35 prix fixe menu ($50 with wine pairing) available on Tuesday nights. Brunch buffet: $40 for adults, $20 for children.
What We Liked Tuna tartare; Primi pizza; grilled octopus; burrata; selection of salumi and fromaggi; rib-eye steak; chicken scarpariello; bucatini cacio e pepe; roasted branzino; tiramisù,Chocolate Primi.
If You Go Tuesdays and Wednesdays, 5 to 9:30 p.m.; Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, until 11 p.m.; Sundays, 4 to 9:30 p.m.; Sunday brunch, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.
Ratings Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair, Poor
A version of this review appears in print on May 15, 2016, on Page LI8 of the New York edition with the headline: Contender Throws a One-Two Punch.
