Cancer in a Presidential Candidate
American hearts go out to former Senator Paul Tsongas, who has just learned that a growth in his abdomen is cancerous. Mr. Tsongas won admirers everywhere with his tell-voters-the-truth campaign for the Democratic nomination this year. The fates have not been kind to this courageous public servant, who has already survived two previous bouts with cancer. 
 But even as concerned citizens pray for his speedy recovery, it is important to recognize that his individual plight points to a public problem: How can the electorate learn whether candidates for the nation's highest office are healthy enough to handle it? 
 If Mr. Tsongas had gone on to win, America would now have a President-elect stricken with a debilitating, conceivably life-threatening disease. It's always possible that a stricken President could have his cancer removed or controlled with only minor impact on his job performance. But there are more frightening scenarios. 
 The stricken leader might face arduous radiation or drug therapy that could sap his energy and divert his attention just when he most needed to master his new responsibilities. Or the cancer might eventually kill him, possibly while in office. 
 The electorate was given only sketchy information about Mr. Tsongas' previous bouts with cancer. In 1983 he was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the infection-fighting lymphatic system. In 1986, when the lymphoma got worse, he was given a radical new treatment -- a bone marrow transplant -- in an effort to cure him. 
 When Mr. Tsongas' health became an issue during the primaries, his doctors at first said he had been free of all traces of cancer ever since, suggesting that the radical procedure had cured him. Only after he dropped out of the campaign did they acknowledge that he had suffered a "localized relapse," suggesting that the cure may not have been complete. 
 Now a cancerous growth has been found in Mr. Tsongas' abdomen. Whether it is related to the previous lymphomas or is a new tumor is not yet clear. But this third appearance of cancer suggests that the electorate needed more complete information on the health of this candidate. 
 At a minimum, it would be wise to require all Presidential candidates to make their full medical records available for evaluation to an independent panel. Better yet, all serious candidates might undergo examination by independent experts. 
 No system can detect all ailments -- or tumors that have not yet emerged. But the case of Mr. Tsongas provides poignant evidence that more searching scrutiny is needed.
