Story Was Fine, the Headline Less So
The House of Representatives narrowly passed a Republican effort to repeal and replace Obamacare on Thursday. Credit Nicholas Kamm/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images

When the House of Representatives passed the Republican health care bill Thursday, The New York Times was quick to publish a sidebar that mapped out the bill’s potential impact on individuals. The winners? The wealthy and upper middle class. The losers? The poor and elderly.
Only here was the headline in print: “Wealthy People Benefit, the Poor Much Less So.”
Hmm. Actually, the poor don’t benefit at all. To the contrary.
Readers were quick to point this out.
“Yes, wealthy people would benefit under the House-passed American Health Care Act,” said Bob Jacobson of Port Chester, N.Y. “But the poor? As the article itself makes abundantly clear, a great many poor people would not benefit at all under proposed changes in the law.” Jacobson also noted that the digital headline was more on the mark, though still vague: “Who Wins and Who Loses in the Latest G.O.P. Health Care Bill.”
I asked the editor who runs the desk responsible for the headline about the thinking behind it.
“The headline was written as a rhetorical device, using understatement to make a point,” said Tom Jolly, associate masthead editor. “As the article itself says, the poor are among the losers in the legislation.”
I suspect there was no purposeful intent to try to soft-pedal the impact of the bill on low-income Americans. It seems more like a hurried attempt to employ a turn of phrase, only one that went a bit south.
One reader, Liz Smith, put it better than I on Twitter:
 @JuddLegum Alive people enjoying life, the dead much less so. 
 — Liz Smith (@SmithDryGoods) May 5, 2017 
  Correction: May 5, 2017  
 
An earlier version of this column misstated the headline in question. It was “Wealthy People Benefit, the Poor Much Less So,” not “Wealthy People Benefit, the Poor Less So.”
Follow the public editor on Twitter @spaydl and reach her by email at public@nytimes.com.
