A Monster Truck Cleans Up Its Act
REGULAR OR NATURAL? When it’s time to fill up, the Bi-Fuel Ford F-250 Super Duty has twice the tanks to feed. Credit Ford Motor

TESTED 2012 Bi-Fuel Ford F-250 Lariat Super Duty 4x4 Crew Cab
WHAT IS IT? A heavy-duty work truck that can run on compressed natural gas or gasoline.
HOW MUCH? As tested, $58,385. Base truck is $47,435; natural gas conversion is an additional $10,950.
WHAT MAKES IT RUN? 6.2-liter V-8 (385 horsepower); 6-speed automatic.
WHAT WILL IT CARRY? On either fuel, towing capacity is 12,000 pounds and the maximum payload is 3,290 pounds.
HOW THIRSTY? As a heavy-duty vehicle with a fully loaded weight of more than 8,500 pounds, the F-250’s mileage is not estimated by the E.P.A. Expect 12 to 15 m.p.g. either on gasoline or the gallon equivalent of natural gas.
ALTERNATIVES Ram 2500 SLT 4x4 C.N.G. Heavy Duty pickup, $47,870. Available late this year will be Chevrolet Silverado and GMC Sierra extended-cab C.N.G. pickups, starting at $43,325.
I WAS expecting a truck, not a monster truck. The bi-fuel Ford F-250 Super Duty, capable of running on either gasoline or compressed natural gas, known as C.N.G., took up more than one side of my two-car driveway, dwarfing and menacing the compact car on the other side. In doing so, it eloquently addressed one of the prime advantages of natural gas over electricity as a way to move vehicles forward: it is scalable and can be practically adapted to 18-wheelers and commuter cars.
Drivers accustomed to these big load haulers won’t notice much of a performance difference when running on natural gas. It takes some experience to learn how to back the vehicle up or maneuver in tight parking lots, but I could relax once the behemoth was pointed straight ahead. Around town and on the highway, the F-250 had plenty of pulling power on natural gas. That’s not surprising, considering the high torque rating of the 6.2-liter V-8.
Natural gas is the default setting for this truck. There’s no toggle to switch over to gasoline, or back, so I wasn’t able to contrast the performance on the two fuels. The transition to gasoline, which occurs only when the C.N.G. supply is depleted, is said to be seamless, but I couldn’t prove it because I didn’t run out of natural gas.
Having driven a variety of big V-8 pickups, I found the SuperDuty had plenty of muscle running on C.N.G. In Connecticut, on a long run down the Merritt Parkway, I stayed in the fast lane and gunned the truck around slower traffic. At 65 m.p.h., it was still responding well to the accelerator. Perhaps because I’ve driven a lot of electric cars lately, I kept an anxious eye on the C.N.G. gauge — which measures pounds per square inch of pressure in the tank — but it didn’t move much.
Although flex-fuel cars and trucks able to burn E85 ethanol are relatively common, a broad shift to vehicles powered by natural gas, the cleanest of fossil fuels, has been limited by a shortage of publicly available filling stations. (There are about 500 in the United States, the American Gas Association says.) But exceptionally low natural gas prices, partly a result of the controversial practice of hydraulic fracturing, is changing the equation and forcing fleet buyers, in particular, to pay attention.
“There’s definitely major interest in C.N.G. from fleet buyers,” said Mike Levine, a spokesman for Ford. “It’s the cheapest fuel out there.”
Another advantage is reduced emissions. The gas association asserts that a natural gas vehicle reduces greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent, compared with an equivalent gasoline model, and that emissions of carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds and nitrogen oxides are also reduced. The trade-off is an increase in methane emissions.
The only available C.N.G. car available in the United States from a major manufacturer is the Honda Civic Natural Gas. But a number of manufacturers, including General Motors, Chrysler and Ford, make natural gas trucks available through dealerships for fleet customers. The Ford Super Duty in my driveway received hardened valves and seats, a bi-fuel manifold and expanded engine calibration from the factory.
The truck was sent to Westport LD, one of six companies licensed to do conversions for Ford, for installation of C.N.G.-ready fuel injectors, pressure regulator, fuel and coolant lines and other parts. That added $9,750 to the purchase price. Another $1,200 went into a 24.5-gallon-equivalent C.N.G. tank (an 18.4-gallon tank is included). The larger tank intrudes 24 inches into the bed.
So equipped, the F-250 can go about 650 miles before refueling — impressive for such a big, thirsty vehicle.
C.N.G. has much lower energy density than gasoline, but the calculations to determine a gallon equivalent take that into account. Still, a pickup like the F-250 (or F-350; a package is available for that even-bigger gun) would have range challenges on just that fuel. A gallon equivalent of C.N.G., pressurized to 3,600 pounds per square inch, takes up 0.51 cubic foot of volume, enough space for 3.82 gallons of gasoline.
According to AltFuelPrices.com, a gallon equivalent of natural gas costs about $2.60 at stations in the New York City area. In a calculation by Dr. Kathryn Clay, executive director of the Drive Natural Gas Initiative, the payback time for my truck’s natural gas package would be from 1.8 years (at 8 m.p.g.) to 4.9 years (at 22 m.p.g.) . That analysis assumes the truck is driven 28,000 miles annually, that gasoline costs $3.60 a gallon and that natural gas is $2 for the equivalent of a gallon of gas. (In April, an Energy Department report found the national average was $2.08.)
C.N.G. has some dissenters. In an opinion piece on a company Web site, ExxonMobil cited the reduced cargo space of C.N.G. vehicles and the need for more frequent, longer fill-ups. “A government push to subsidize or mandate the expanded use of natural gas in the transportation sector is a wrong turn,” ExxonMobil said.
Dr. Clay said chemical companies that rely on natural gas as a raw material fear higher prices if C.N.G. is used widely in vehicles. Their opposition is one factor in the stalled effort to pass the Natural Gas Act, supported by the financier T. Boone Pickens, which (in differing House and Senate versions) would provide a five-year jump-start for natural gas vehicles and filling stations through various tax credits.
But even without tax incentives, the fuel’s low cost provides an impetus to convert fleets to natural gas. Getting consumers into C.N.G. cars will be tougher: there are few home refueling units. The sole available model, the Phill from BRC FuelMaker, costs $4,500.
But General Electric announced this month that it was working to develop a more affordable natural-gas filler.
A version of this review appears in print on July 29, 2012, on Page AU2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Monster Truck Cleans Up Its Act.
