Book Review
Highlights

Credit Christoph Niemann

 Nonfiction
  A Conservative’s Case Against Donald Trump 
 
 David Frum argues in “Trumpocracy” that the president is a menace to the Republic.
 
 

Credit Courtesy of Argonne National Laboratory

 Nonfiction
  A Remarkable Man Among Remarkable Men and Women 
 
 David N. Schwartz’s “The Last Man Who Knew Everything” recounts the life of the great physicist Enrico Fermi.
 
 

Credit Ernst Haeckel

  The Passion and Peril of Birding 
 
 Three new books, reviewed by Richard Prum, take an unvarnished look at birdmania, from the fun to the pathological.
 
 

Credit Nishant Choksi

 Help Desk
  Guides for Better Living From Around the World 
 
 Foreign self-help advice for American strivers: French tips on geriatric sex and generic charm, plus Swedish and Japanese hints on achieving serenity.
 
 
 
 Match Book
 

Credit Joon Mo Kang

  Dear Match Book: Tales From Behind the Camera? 
 Books that reveal the process of making glamorous productions on stage and screen.
 
 
 Fiction
 

Credit Chloe Scheffe

  A Novel That Asks, What if Abortion Were Again Illegal? 
 “Red Clocks,” by Leni Zumas, imagines a dystopian near-future in which women are once again stripped of reproductive freedoms.
 
 
 The Book Review Podcast
 

Credit

  ‘Off the Charts’ 
 Ann Hulbert discusses her new book about child prodigies, and Sam Graham-Felsen talks about his debut novel, “Green.”
 
 
 
 Editors’ Choice
 

Credit

  10 New Books We Recommend This Week 
 Suggested reading from critics and editors at The New York Times.
 
 
 
 Best Sellers
 

Credit

  Best-Seller Lists for Jan. 28, 2018 
 All the lists: print, e-books, fiction, nonfiction, children’s books and more.
 
 
 
 Nonfiction
 

Credit RJ Sangosti/The Denver Post, via Getty Images

  At a Public School in Denver, Refugee Children Find Hope and Frustration 
 In “The Newcomers,” Helen Thorpe documents a class of immigrant teenagers while the Trump campaign stirs up nativist resentment.
 
 
 Interview
 

Credit Philip Montgomery for The New York Times

  No Longer Writing, Philip Roth Still Has Plenty to Say 
 In an exclusive interview, the (former) novelist shares his thoughts on Trump, #MeToo and retirement.
 
 
 Fiction
 

Credit Josh Cochran

  Beware of Family Members Bearing Gifts 
 In “Winter,” the second in her cycle of seasonal novels, Ali Smith engineers a contentious Christmas reunion between two long-estranged sisters.
 
 
 Nonfiction
 

Credit Josh Cochran

  Knausgaard’s Seasonal Book Series Continues With a Wintry Mix 
 The essays in “Winter” have a characteristically Scandinavian focus on darkness, snow, quiet, emptiness and depression.
 
 
 Crime
 

Credit Pablo Amargo

  Keep Watch Over Your Children: Danger Lurks Everywhere 
 In Marilyn Stasio’s latest Crime column, we meet a murderous nanny, an abducted teenager, a little boy stranded in the high desert and a mad bomber.
