Embattled Michigan State President Lou Anna Simon Resigns
Lou Anna Simon submitted her resignation as president of Michigan State University. Credit Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters

Lou Anna K. Simon, the president of Michigan State University, resigned Wednesday night after coming under increasing pressure to do so over the school’s ties with Lawrence G. Nassar, the former team doctor for the American gymnastics team sentenced on Wednesday for multiple sex crimes.
“To the survivors, I can never say enough that I am so sorry that a trusted, renowned physician was really such an evil, evil person who inflicted such harm under the guise of medical treatment,” Ms. Simon said in her resignation letter, which was posted on the university website.
Ms. Simon’s departure ends a career at the university that has spanned more than four decades.
After Ms. Simon received a doctoral degree at Michigan State in 1974, she accepted a job in its institutional research office as an assistant professor. She quickly rose through the leadership ranks. She became an assistant provost in the early 1980s and eventually became the 20th president of the university in 2005, the first woman to hold the position.
At the time, Ms. Simon’s supporters praised her selection for the job, saying her experience allowed to work with all facets of the university.
Advertisement
“She’s a brilliant woman and she masters the jargon in every area that she works with right away and she uses it,” Eileen VanTassell, a professor who joined the school in the 1960s, told the Lansing State Journal in 2005.
Ms. Simon became president of Michigan State, then the seventh largest university in the country, at a difficult time. The university was starting a billion-dollar capital campaign and expanding its reach in the state, opening a medical school in Grand Rapids. But within a few years, the economy fell into a recession and the cost of student tuition at Michigan State and elsewhere climbed unabated.
Amid financial straits, Ms. Simon won over members on the university’s board of trustees and its students when she declined a pay raise in 2008. That year, her salary was $520,000. It is now $750,000, one of the highest among public university presidents.
In December, she turned down another pay raise amid growing public outcry over how much she knew or should have known about the abuses by Dr. Nassar, who was a faculty member and treated athletes there. The university has maintained that no Michigan State officials knew about allegations against Dr. Nassar until a newspaper reported them in 2016.
Ms. Simon, who was in the courtroom one day during the sentencing to hear victim impact statements, apologized for the abuse last month. “I am truly sorry for the abuse you suffered, the pain it caused, and the pain it continues to cause today,” she said. “I am sorry a physician who called himself a Spartan so utterly betrayed your trust and everything this university stands for.”
