Waco review – cult drama series retells violent history with little finesse
2 / 5 stars 
A glossy new show examines the events leading up to the tragic siege of 1993 but despite the dramatic potential, it’s a shallow disappointment with a criminally wasted Michael Shannon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taylor Kitsch in Waco. Photograph: Paramount Network

Sex is always the dead giveaway for charlatans preaching false gospels of enlightenment. Creeps capitalized on the prevalence of “free love” to score with flower children during the upheavals of the 1960s, Silicon Valley CEOs are throwing chauvinistic sex soirees under the guise of evolved thinking, and somewhere in between the two, David Koresh got a whole bunch of women pregnant.
In the new miniseries Waco, a recently inducted follower (Rory Culkin) has his first misgivings about the legitimacy of the self-styled prophet (an ornately mulleted Taylor Kitsch, two notches too handsome to make sense in the role) when Koresh mentions that in order to keep his flock free from sin, he nobly shoulders the burden of having all of the strictly reproductive sex in the compound he calls home. Elsewhere on the grounds, a devout Branch Davidian named Steve (Paul Sparks) doesn’t love that Koresh has stepped in to impregnate his wife Judy (Andrea Riseborough) and name the child. 
They smell something amiss with the outwardly beatific, inwardly opportunistic Koresh; the insular, precarious empire he’s built in this secured facility cannot last forever. And soon, to help along its collapse, a hit squad of FBI and ATF operatives will set up shop on the dusty desert expanse that would have otherwise been their front lawn.
But we already knew all that. Any prospective viewer of the brothers Drew and John Erick Dowdle’s historical thriller either remembers the grueling 51-day siege in Waco, Texas, or can spend all of two minutes on Google. Presumably aware of this, the brothers open the pilot episode of the six-installment run in medias res on the first shots exchanged between the Branch Davidians and the assorted governmental agencies dispatched to disarm and dismantle them. Any hopes that they’d use this series to more incisively inspect the series of events surrounding the standoff rather than plainly restage them soon evaporate, however.
The series is about as artful as a long-game (the siege doesn’t begin until three episodes in) social studies 101 report, and the pilot arranges its narrative with same parallelism between the law and those breaking it as in any other crime drama. As we’re shown around Koresh’s little world of fanaticism via Culkin’s newcomer, so too does the negotiator Gary Noesner (Michael Shannon) provide an introduction to a changing FBI. The Dowdles make rather clumsy lunges at complicating the ethical profiles of either side in the impending conflict, all of them hamstrung by cliches deployed as recently as last year’s run of American Horror Story. Most of the Branch Davidians just want to worship in peace, but their pure intentions are led astray by Koresh’s rough-hewn charisma. The feds set out to protect and defend, but reckless thugs in their ranks have a dirty tendency to shoot before taking proper precautions.
The script allots these two camps one substantive idea apiece: that federal defense organizations have slid from intelligence-gathering into an excessively military mode, and that Koresh’s anti-authoritarian separatism may be a prelude to the surge of flyover-country disenfranchisement that cleared a path for America’s current commander-in-chief. But while both concepts have palpable promise, they’ve been expressed in the plainest imaginable terms. Noesner grips a glass of whiskey and grumbles about his inner conflict to his wife as if reading parenthetical stage direction, and Koresh merely spells out the appeal of his radically alternative lifestyle instead of trapping his latest prey with a genuinely meaningful experience. Aren’t cult leaders supposed to be tactful?
It is perhaps more exciting to watch this tragic footnote of American fringe culture played out than to, say, read about it on Wikipedia, and yet it is hardly more edifying. Paramount Network, eager to prove its bona fides in a crowded premium cable marketplace, has indeed written the checks required for a series with enough panoramic visuals to earn the dubious distinction of “prestige” TV. But the Dowdles’ primary work has been re-enactment rather than dramatization, presenting these characters and images without developing them beyond their factual bullet points. And while the series has plenty more unspooling to do – the pilot ends with the silent, glowering face of John Leguizamo, who will soon go undercover in the compound as ATF agent Robert Rodriguez – it continues to cover breadth rather than depth.
A defter creative hand may be able to carve an affecting and relevant saga out of the Waco quagmire, and for all we know, the forthcoming film by Jaume Collet-Serra, director of The Shallows, will be the one to do it. For now, though, viewers will have to settle for Kitsch’s messiah figure and yet another agent-type whose professional frustrations disrupt his home life from Shannon, the latest in a string of similar gigs cluttering up the master thespian’s filmography. The tragic conclusion to the Waco incident didn’t leave too many survivors, but hopefully Shannon will be able to make it out with his career and dignity intact.
Waco begins on the Paramount Network on 24 January with a UK date to be confirmed
 Topics
