IMF lifts global growth forecast to 3.9%, saying momentum is building
Donald Trump’s US tax cut is expected to stimulate economic growth, the IMF says. Photograph: Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images

The International Monetary Fund has lifted its forecasts for global growth, saying momentum is building in global economic activity and Donald Trump’s tax cuts in the US are likely to stimulate activity further.
It says the growth momentum is expected to carry into 2018 and 2019, and it has revised upwards its global growth forecasts by 0.2 percentage points for both years, from 3.7% to 3.9%.
But it has warned that extreme weather events – such as droughts in Australia, and hurricanes in the Atlantic – pose a significant risk to its positive forecasts, saying “recurrent, potent climate events” impose “devastating humanitarian costs and economic losses” on affected regions.
It has also warned growing financial vulnerabilities could derail its forecasts, as could increasing trade barriers flowing from poorly executed trade renegotiations between the UK and the rest of the EU, and between the US, Canada and Mexico.
It says Trump’s corporate tax cuts are expected to stimulate activity, with the short-term impact in the US mostly driven by the investment response to the tax policy changes.
It estimates the effect on US growth of the tax cuts will be positive through 2020, accumulating to 1.2% through that year, with a range of uncertainty around its central scenario.
But it also warns the effect of the cuts will probably wear off quickly – before detracting from growth “for a few years from 2022 onwards”.
The IMF released an update of its World Economic Outlook on Tuesday. It came a day after Oxfam Australia released a report showing the level of wealth held by Australia’s richest 1% grew to 23% in 2017, up from 22% the year before, with the top 1% owning more wealth than the bottom 70% of Australians combined.
The report, Growing Gulf Between Work and Wealth, shows the wealth share held by the top 1% in Australia has been growing almost continuously over the past two decades, and income inequality has steadily climbed too, despite some fluctuations.
The IMF says the pick-up in global growth last year was broad-based, with 120 countries – accounting for three quarters of world GDP – experiencing stronger growth in year-on-year terms, making it the broadest synchronised global growth surge since 2010.
It says global economic output is estimated to have grown by 3.7% in 2017, which is 0.1 percentage points faster than projected in October, and 0.5 percentage points higher than projected in 2016.
It has told policymakers that the current cyclical upswing provides an “ideal opportunity” for reforms.
“Shared priorities across all economies include implementing structural reforms to boost potential output and making growth more inclusive,” the IMF update says. “In an environment of financial market optimism, ensuring financial resilience is imperative.
“Weak inflation suggests that slack remains in many advanced economies and monetary policy should continue to remain accommodative.
“However, the improved growth momentum means that fiscal policy should increasingly be designed with an eye on medium-term goals – ensuring fiscal sustainability and bolstering potential output. 
“Multilateral cooperation remains vital for securing the global recovery.”
 Topics
