'Focus on something green': how Hyeon Chung rose to prominence | Kate O'Halloran
Advice from the family doctor about astigmatism in his eye set the Korean on the path to tennis glory

Finally, the “Grand Slam of the Asia-Pacific” has a new Asian hero to idolise. After upsetting six-time Australian champion Open Novak Djokovic in straight sets on Monday night, Hyeon Chung became the first South Korean to advance to a grand slam quarter-final. But it wasn’t just the calibre of the opponent that won over a new legion of fans, it was the matter in which the game was won; Chung, according to coach Neville Godwin, succeeded in “out-Djokovic-ing Novak Djokovic”.
Now, another hurdle – in the form of another surprise package, Tennys Sandgren – must be overcome on Wednesday afternoon on Rod Laver Arena if he is to make further history by reaching the semi-finals at Melbourne Park.
It’s a remarkable feat for a 21-year-old who took up the game by medical accident. Chung suffers from astigmatism, which destroyed his eyesight, and as a child, was told by his family doctor that it would help if he “focused on something green”. Unusually, given the relative obscurity of tennis in South Korea, Chung’s father had played tennis, as did his older brother. The obvious answer was that Chung would pursue tennis, although he was also a promising taekwondo fighter, and had to make the unpopular decision to do away with the national sport for a much more Western-centric pursuit. His father obliged as coach – and continued in this role until as recently as December 2017 – and by Chung’s 18th birthday he was ranked in the 60s.
As long-time coach of Kevin Anderson, Godwin met Chung when Anderson and he practised together (they had the same agent through IMG). Then, Godwin says, Chung had a “rawness” about him, “but you could really see this was a guy who could move, and strike the ball”.
“He needed maturing and developing, and although he was ranked so highly, he’d been playing mainly challengers rather than on the main tour. I think he found that first year on tour a real adjustment. I was very excited to be asked [if I would be interested] in coaching him.”
For what it’s worth, Anderson said the glimpses of personality shown by Chung in his win over Djokovic are an accurate reflection of the character of the man.
“He’s pretty much exactly what he displays. He’s a calm guy, with a fantastic sense of humour. He doesn’t take himself too seriously – or I should say his position too seriously – he’s trying to improve, and win tennis matches, but he’s very approachable, a lovely kid.”
Godwin is aware, he says, of just what Chung’s rise will mean for tennis in Korea – even if the player himself is currently just “involved in the moment”.
“He’ll feel it when he gets [home]. It really is massive, they [South Korea and Asian tennis more broadly] have been crying out for new tennis stars. Kei Nishikori has been the flag-bearer for a while, and of course the Koreans and Japanese don’t always see eye-to-eye, so they’ll be happy to have someone to stand up to Kei.
“Chung has been on the front page of every newspaper this week, and I think it’s rightfully massive. He’s a great person to have that impact.”
Asian tennis has, of course, been on an upward trajectory since Li Na’s breakthrough French and Australian Open titles, in 2011 and 2014 respectively. When she competed in the final in Melbourne, 100m Chinese viewers tuned in. It changed public perceptions of tennis in China, where the pursuit had previously been reserved only for those likely to make it to the top echelon.
Even in Nishikori’s absence, this tournament has seen the breakthrough performance of young Japanese player Naomi Osaka, who knocked out Australia’s Ashleigh Barty and eventually lost to world No1 Simona Halep, while Su-Wei Hseih also made it to the fourth round before she was ousted by US Open champion Angelique Kerber. This has contributed to further tourism to Australia by Asian tennis fans, while Chung’s famous victory is likely to bring further local media attention to the game, as well as the player himself.
Asked if he has the personality for the inevitable attention, Godwin replied: “I don’t think anyone’s ever ready for that kind of thing. It just hits you, and it’s much bigger than you could ever imagine.
“His improving English is helping with his confidence, but coming here is completely foreign for Asian players, and his natural personality is shy. Now that his personality is coming through, he’ll be someone people will follow.”
As for the obvious comparisons to Djokovic, Godwin said he was working on the “offensive” side of Chung’s game as much as the defensive.
“There are definite similarities, he’s incredibly flexible, moves very well, does the splits most of the time ... but you could argue he [Chung] has got more firepower from the back, he can pull the trigger a bit more. I don’t want him running around too far back behind the court. I’d like to see him use his phenomenal speed to get to the net more.”
Godwin has also been working on changing some of the technical elements of his game, such as encouraging him to be “taller” with his serve and says he has helped Chung to play a more “high percentage” service game which has led to his charge feeling much more comfortable on court. 
Given he has only been at the helm for a month, Godwin adds that he won’t be “messing” with things too much – but he has provided some practical advice given Chung’s rising star, such as the need to set up training bases in Europe and the US, as well as in Seoul, where Godwin says Chung likes to return to whenever he can. 
In the meantime, Godwin is backing his new pupil to become the first South Korean to make a grand slam semi-final by beating Sandgren, who he overcame in three-sets in Auckland in the lead-up to this tournament. 
“We’re taking it one match at a time, but [so far] he’s delivered the goods. He’s stuck to the plans, been brave in the right moments. In all of his games, he has dictated play – he’s gone out there and won it.
“The sky is the limit. His progress is really good, he’s confident, but quietly confident, and he can go as far as he wants.”
 Topics
