Tomas Berdych v Roger Federer: Australian Open quarter-final – live!
Roger Federer plays a backhand return to Tomas Berdych during their quarter-final. Photograph: Saeed Khan/AFP/Getty Images

Second set: Berdych 6-7, 1-2 Federer* (*denotes server): The game goes to deuce. Federer’s still erratic. He nets a backhand to give Berdych a break point. Again, though, his skill sinks Berdych, a backhand down the line leaving the Czech stranded and forlorn. Strong at the net, Federer holds. “Even though he had set points and what not, one always felt that it was a matter of when, and not if, Federer would come roaring back,” says Shankar Mony. “To play that poorly and still win the set only bodes well for Roger. One would feel sorry for Tomas except that he does this most every time he plays a big name. Just not enough self-belief. If I am being harsh it is because I am disgusted, these fellows do not give you cause to support them. I predict a one break second set and then a tiebreak in the 3rd that Berdych will lose as well. Seen this many, many times.” Me too, Shankar.
First set: Berdych* 5-4 Federer (*denotes server): Serving for the set, Berdych starts to feel it for the first time, netting a backhand to make it 0-15. Federer is geeing himself up. He senses something might be afoot here. It’s certainly tense. A Berdych second serve is called out - and then it’s swiftly corrected. Federer challenges, but the ball caught the line, so Berdych gets another first serve. A strange rule, but there’s nothing Federer can do about it - or a huge Berdych forehand down the line for 15-all. Federer keeps pushing, however, moving into a 15-30 lead, and then Berdych pings a backhand miles wide to make it 15-40. Berdych hammers a first serve down the middle. Federer returns and challenges the serve as Berdych punches a volley away. There’s a delay as we wait for HawkEye. But, er, HawkEye does not compute. The machine’s broken! Technology has let us down! Federer is furious. We can’t see HawkEye! Although it does turn out that the ball was in. One break point’s gone and the other soon disappears too. Deuce. But Federer’s pumped up now! He forces Berdych to err again and he bellows as the Czech’s defensive volley flies long. It’s just not going Federer’s way, though. Berdych does a drop shot. The ball clips the top of the net and dribbles over to Federer’s side. Berdych proceeds to earn his first set point with an ace. Federer responds by pushing a backhand return down the line to save himself and he earns his fourth break point by attacking with his forehand. There’s no escape for Berdych this time. Federer flays a backhand down the line and there goes the break! Despite the drama of the game, it felt faintly predictable. Does Berdych truly believe?
First set: Berdych* 4-1 Federer (*denotes server): Federer charges the net, forcing Berdych to go big, and the Czech’s backhand flies long for 0-15. At 15-all, Berdych cracks a forehand to the Federer backhand and comes to the net. Federer picks him off down the line for 15-30. Berdych decides to turn up the power. Federer nets a forehand. 30-all. The Swiss still isn’t totally with us. He pings a forehand down the line and skips to the net, only to punch a gimme of a volley wide. It would have been a break point. Instead it’s 40-30. Berdych thumps an ace away to hold and keep his nose in front.
Preamble
Hello. You have to feel for Tomas Berdych. After showing his grand slam pedigree to reach the last eight of the Australian Open for the seventh time in the last eight years, trust his luck that his Big Four opponent today isn’t a hobbling Andy Murray, a tennis-elbowed Novak Djokovic or a knee-knacked Rafa Nadal, but a fully functioning Roger Federer, the defending champion and a physical freak at the grand old age of 36. Poor Tiger Tomas, the Czech Republic’s answer to Tim Henman. You have to admire the way the 32-year-old keeps plugging away in the hope of winning his first ever major title, but it’s just his luck to find himself in Federer’s quarter. It was the Swiss, of course, who dumped him out of the third round here last year and who beat him in the quarter-finals two years ago, not to mention sending Berdych on his way when they met in the Wimbledon semi-finals last year.
And at first glance it’s difficult to see how this is going to go any other way. Federer has played supreme tennis during the Melbourne fortnight, never really finding himself in any danger of dropping a set in his first four matches, and the second seed is likely to be even more motivated now that Nadal and Djokovic have wandered off to the hospital waiting room. Murray and Stan Wawrinka have already had their appointments with the doctor and while his biggest rivals nurse their respective ailments, Federer glides on, unruffled and untroubled, better than ever, still as regal as he ever was. A year ago he was in the midst of an astonishing comeback. He had returned after six months off with a knee injury and he entered this tournament as the 17th seed. Nobody gave him much hope of winning a first grand slam since 2012. Now it is no exaggeration to say that it will be a huge shock if he isn’t holding the trophy this Sunday. It would be the 20th grand slam title of his career.
But wait! Shocks happen. They’ve already happened in this strange tournament. For all that Djokovic’s elbow played up, few people expected him to fall to Hyeon Chung (the brilliant Korean who awaits the winner of this match in the last four), Marin Cilic to find it within himself to fight back from behind to outlast Nadal or for rising British star Kyle Edmund to stun Grigor Dimitrov. Sport is unpredictable. Everybody expected Federer to win the ATP World Tour Finals when Nadal pulled out, including this correspondent, and then he lost to David Goffin. He isn’t invincible and that’s what Berdych has to tell himself. The 19th seed, who has dropped only two sets in making it this far, is playing well. His power game is functioning. He needs to forget about losing his past eight matches to Federer and that he trails 19-6 in their head-to-head. He needs to tell himself that last year was, well, last year. He needs to think about the times he outmuscled Federer at Wimbledon and the US Open. He needs to believe - otherwise we’re in for a fairly pointless couple of hours.
Play begins at: 8.30am GMT, 7.30pm in Melbourne.
Updated at 1.46am EST
