Ban credit cards for online gambling, says government review
A gambling website. The government faces calls to introduce measures to tackle the ‘hidden addiction’ suffered by problem gamblers. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo

A ban on using credit cards for online gambling and a mandatory levy on gambling firms to fund addiction treatment are among last-minute recommendations submitted as part of a government review of gambling regulation.
As a consultation by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) drew to a close, ministers faced calls to introduce concrete measures to tackle the “hidden addiction” suffered by the UK’s estimated 430,000 problem gamblers.
A decision on the maximum bet on fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) has attracted most attention from lobbyists and campaigners, with the government reportedly ready to slash the permitted stake from £100 to £2.
But a submission by thinktank ResPublica called for a mandatory levy on bookmakers and online gaming firms, a policy supported by Labour, to address a gulf between the amount spent on problem gambling versus other forms of addiction.
 Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk 
ResPublica found that the annual spend on problem gambling research, education and treatment in England is only £133 per person, compared with £377 on drug addiction and £385 on alcohol misuse. It said a mandatory levy set at 1% of the industry’s profits would raise £135m to bridge the funding gap.
As it stands, gambling companies contribute 0.1% of their revenues on a voluntary basis, a pledge that GambleAware, the main conduit for the funds, says many firms are failing to honour.
GambleAware and Citizens’ Advice have both also called for a mandatory levy to better fund treatment.
The charity said it had been able to treat just 8,800 people last year, 2% of the estimated 430,000 people in the UK with a gambling problem.
It also listed a series of measures it said would help tackle addiction, including a ban on using credit cards to bet online, which it said “significantly increases the risk gamblers will gamble more than they can afford”.
Chief executive Marc Etches said: “With 430,000 problem gamblers and a further 2m adults at risk of developing a problem, GambleAware is concerned about the impact this hidden addiction has on people’s lives.”
He said the charity supports a reduction in the maximum stake on fixed-odds betting terminals, which is fiercely opposed by bookmakers, who derived more than half of their revenue from the controversial machines last year.
But he called on DCMS not to ignore the frequency of bets permitted by FOBTs, which allow gamblers to stake £100 every 20 seconds.
Deputy Labour leader Tom Watson said called on the government to reduce the maximum stake to £2. He said: “Anything less will represent a capitulation to the lobbying power of the big gambling companies and will be letting down the families and communities that have been devastated by addiction to these machines.
“Lowering the stake must be just one part of a broader process of tackling the hidden epidemic of problem gambling. Once this decision is made the government needs to concentrate on other means of preventing addiction and properly funding treatment to help addicts recover.”
 Topics
