The Devil’s Highway by Gregory Norminton review – on a Roman road to ruin
An ancient route links Britain’s deep past and far future in an ecologically aware tale spanning thousands of years 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The remains of the Roman wall at Silchester. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo

Gregory Norminton’s fifth novel arrives after a gap of nine years and is very much the ecologically aware fiction you would expect of a contributor to Paul Kingsnorth and Dougald Hine’s Dark Mountain project, the network of writers, artists and thinkers who believe that the conversations we are having about environmental collapse are too comfortable to encourage change.
The Devil’s Highway accounts for some thousands of years of human history in very slightly more than 200 pages, a feat of compression managed by three interwoven timelines, alternating chapter by chapter and linked through the presence of a real Roman road – the titular highway – which in our day can still be followed from Sunningdale in Berkshire, across the Blackwater river, to Silchester and beyond.
Norminton begins with a Roman-British boy called Andagin (whose name might already be interpreted as “and again”) hunting a hare across the scrubland that will become Bagshot Heath. He moves through disordered relationships and wasted lives in present-day Bagshot, and closes a thousand years after that in the sub-Saharan desert that has replaced much of south-east England. The road endures. So do the heath and its mythologies: in satisfyingly Alan Garneresque fashion, the cycle of stories – historical, contemporary and science fictional – implies a single underlying narrative of landscape; human behaviour echoes from time frame to time frame, through the same cautious liaisons and breakages of trust, the same muddles of love and prejudice, the same sense of family as central to survival.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gregory Norminton. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian

“One place,” says an inhabitant of Norminton’s future, “is lots of places if you wait long enuf [sic].” But if the novelist is patient enough to work from this perspective, his characters aren’t. Their experience is urgent, phenomenological, human: they live in constant awareness of their environment. As the wounded hare runs from him, Andagin imagines he can “see the ember of its soul rushing to catch up with it”; above them both, the oak canopy clatters and creaks in a bitter wind. Two thousand years later, the land, though reduced, is still a rich source of signifiers, demanding observance, caution or celebration: as she walks through the Bagshot woods, teenager Bobby is equally aware of “dog mess underfoot or bagged and hung from branches”, while her father, irritable, vague yet driven, an obsessive archaeologist soon to be divorced, must keep a constant eye open for illegal motorcyclists joyriding around his beloved heath. “A low bruise of particulates hangs in the air”, and London can be seen in the distance, “gnawing into England’s flesh”.
A thousand years on, a group of starving migrants head west along the Devil’s Highway, fleeing slave-traders, one of whom they’ve killed. Drought is endemic; agriculture is on the edge of collapse; malaria and river blindness have settled in the London Basin. The migrants live by stealing from the ramshackle walled towns or “steds” strung out along the road, an action they describe as “shopping”. They have individual names such as Malk, Efia and Aban, but their identity is collective. They have few desert skills, so their raw awareness of the heath – which they know as “the Heave” – is essentially paranoid. Their post-disaster context is conveyed in ways reminiscent of Will Self’s The Book of Dave or Russell Hoban’s Riddley Walker, in which the reader’s understanding of the future and its socioeconomic spaces is mediated through cracked misappropriations of the English we know: a style in which catastrophes of language construct the language of the catastrophe.
Some of Norminton’s coinages are apt or funny or both: our era, their past, they remember as “the Fast Times”, that “good old when what gives us the bad ole now”. The Midlands becomes, impishly, “the Middens”, and Bagshot has mutated into “Bad Shot”, while “akays” are easily recognised as rifles.
In many ways, this is the liveliest and most interesting of the three strands. Against the harshness of the Heave, the world of Bobby and her father seems predictable and ordinary, while the Roman past’s contribution to the cycle is a little less assured. Its concerns and conflicts seem harder to empathise with, remaining as archaeological product not-quite-sufficiently brought to life. Here, a Roman decurion looks forward to retirement in a rainy country; there, a Briton traps a squirrel using a snare of fibres made from nettles. Their lives are inscribed with care on to a landscape lovingly reconstructed, but the result sometimes feels more like research than fiction. On the other hand, it never fails to provide for the reader the sense of a dependable historical ground, soil for the seeds of Norminton’s argument. Andagin the tribal hunter apologises to every kill, thanking each dying animal for the life it will provide; his Roman counterpart thinks of hunting as a game of triumph and asks himself, “why apologise to a carcass?”
No clearer distinction could be made. The book grows from the Roman delusion that landscape is a passive resource; progresses through the contemporary belief that the world still belongs to us and might yet be saved (by us, from us and for us); and concludes on the Heave, demonstrating the sheer fragility of the human species in the face of what environmental philosophy often describes as a “hyperobject”, an event or a context so much bigger than us that it’s beyond comprehension, let alone management. To the invading Romans, civil engineering appeared like the beginning of something – trade, prosperity, order, a firm grip on the perceived chaos of the tribes and their radicalising Druids. Now it’s the end of everything, half-buried, leading nowhere. The Devil’s Highway trails through its desertified landscape, a conduit for goat-herders, slave-traders and the troops of the shadowy ruling junta. Failure of the human project seems inevitable.
On the Dark Mountain contributor page, Norminton describes himself as determined to maintain a “dourly anthropocentric” optimism. This investment in people (which would seem to distinguish his outlook from that of Kingsnorth, who is two-thirds of the way through a similar attempt to link past, present and future via a trio of linguistically driven novels) protects us from the full existential horror implied by his subject matter; and The Devil’s Highway finds a necessary act of faith with which to complete and bind its stories.
• The Devil’s Highway is published by 4th Estate. To order a copy for £11.04 (RRP £12.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 Topics
