It’s only natural: how good brands can do good too
Paid for by 

Beauty executive Angela Buglass brings her love of the environment to work, creating skincare products naturally while championing ethical and sustainable business practices.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The drying room: Rosehip oil sourced sustainably and ethically from suppliers in the tiny African nation of Lesotho Photograph: Trilogy International

Angela first learned about the importance of sustaining the natural world while milking hundreds of cows from 5am each day in the school holidays on her family’s farm as a child.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Angela tending to cows from her childhood days during the school holidays. Photograph: Angela Buglass

Today the natural world is still central to Angela’s working life as the CEO of an international company that brings sustainable and ethical skincare and home ware brands to a global market from New Zealand, Trilogy International Limited.
“We need to be conscious of how we are treating the planet,” says Angela “You can be good as a brand and also do good. This is top of mind for us and it becomes part of the DNA of the brand.”
Trilogy is perhaps best known for natural skincare products with the majority of its “hero ingredient” rosehip oil sourced sustainably and ethically from suppliers in the tiny African nation of Lesotho and also Chile.
In Lesotho, rosehip bushes grow wild in otherwise inhospitable, craggy areas and are picked for leaves to make tea and harvest seeds for the oil. Trilogy’s latest social investment, aimed at supporting the local community, is a modern oil seed press, which has let its local supplier quadruple production and so buy more rosehip fruit. With a bottle of Trilogy’s rosehip oil sold every twenty seconds, there’s plenty of opportunity for the local community to benefit.
“We are the equivalent of a Fair Trade food brand,” Angela explains. “We have people who go over and work directly with the pickers to make sure they’re getting properly paid. There are not a lot of other crops there and they’re pretty reliant on this.”
In making and distributing its products, the company also takes an ethical stance on key industry issues like animal testing, micro-beads, as well as packaging and recycling.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A horserider travelling through the mountains of Lesotho Photograph: Trilogy International

And with an 85% female team, Trilogy also supports charities that empower and work with women and children in need.
Trilogy has also been carbon neutral since 2007 and has continued to work on benchmarks to minimise the environmental impact of its operations.
Angela says she has noticed these sorts of commitments are an increasing driver for younger consumers and work colleagues: they want their brands to stand for something and not just be a profitable business or favourite product.
“The consumers are very much the drivers of innovation in the business,” she says. “It’s such a changeable industry – there are a lot of trends and fashions.
“Doing what you say you’re going to do is a very important part – and we are a very genuine business. We have real, honest stories about where we spend our time, particularly on our sustainable and ethical practices – it’s not token – it’s an integral part of our business.”
The New Zealand executive studied management at university before starting as a sales rep as part of Procter & Gamble’s graduate recruitment program. She spent 15 years in the UK in a variety of roles in the beauty industry before coming home to New Zealand to join Trilogy in 2014.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rosehip bushes grow wild in Lesotho and thrive in the inhospitable, mountainous landscape. In a country with little infrastructure and employment, where many villages are only accessible by horseback, light aircraft or on foot, harvesting and selling wild rosehips is a valuable source of income for many people. Photograph: Trilogy International

These days, Angela says life as a CEO can be “a little all-consuming” to have time for many extra pursuits.
But while no longer milking cows, she makes sure she still recharges in the natural beauty each weekend in a rural setting 160km from Auckland where she and her husband run a bed and breakfast accommodation business.
“I love being outdoors and I’m a down-to-earth person. I think I’m just a fan of the animals and green grass – I like that rural smell rather than the urban.”
After a career that has taken her around the world, Angela says she is happy being back in New Zealand working with a home-grown success story.
Trilogy International Limited (TIL) is listed on both the Australian and New Zealand stock exchanges. The company’s competitive growth and ethical stance have attracted a large pool of investors – from individuals to ethical superannuation and investment managers such as Australian Ethical.
While Trilogy is TIL’s best-known brand, the company also includes the ECOYA candles and home scents, and the Goodness skincare brand, as well as running CS&Co – a leading New Zealand cosmetics distributor.
The company has also recently taken an 80% acquisition of Lanocorp New Zealand Limited, a developer and manufacturer of skincare, body and hair care products.
Trilogy’s ongoing conviction to sustainable practices and resourcing while still remaining profitable is a testament to viability of ethical business in a marketplace where the bottom line continues to define a company’s success.
