Seventh Bristol university student takes his own life
Bristol University is consulting on a major overhaul of its pastoral care services. Photograph: Loop Images/Simon Montgomery/Getty/Passage

Justin Cheng, a law student from Canada, was found dead on the evening of 12 January, the university confirmed.
Mark Ames, director of student services, said: “Justin was found away from Bristol on the evening of 12 January. The police have told us they believe he took his own life.
“There were no suspicious circumstances and the coroner will hold an inquest in due course. Our thoughts and sympathies are with his family and friends.”
This latest death at Bristol University, one of the most prestigious institutions in the country, comes as it consults on a major overhaul of its pastoral care services. The university says its current provision is out of date and no longer fit for purpose.
Critics are worried the proposed changes will reduce live-in peer support in halls of residence and erode vital face-to-face contact with students. The university insists adequate live-in peer support will continue, backed up by a more professional, round-the-clock service located outside halls.
The proposals have been put out for consultation and if approved are due to be introduced in September.
This latest incident will fuel growing concern about student mental health and the capacity of universities to meet an unprecedented rise in mental health difficulties among young people. 
Students who have recently returned to Bristol and their studies after the Christmas break were offered support following news of Cheng’s death.
Ames said: “It is immensely distressing for members of our university community to learn that one of our students has died. We know that this will be especially difficult for those who knew and studied with Justin.
“If students or staff are affected by this tragic news, we would encourage them to contact university support services as well as seek support from friends or family. Information about where to get help can be found on our website under staff and student pages.
“We will continue to work with our students, staff and with partners across the city including colleagues from public health and the NHS to enhance our services in response to the unprecedented rise in mental health difficulties amongst young people.
“Justin’s family have requested privacy at this very difficult time.”
In the UK the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.
 Topics
