Late-night hosts post-shutdown: 'Trump got back to the important work of trolling'
Comics, including Stephen Colbert and Trevor Noah, discussed the end of the shutdown and the talking stick that may have saved the day
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stephen Colbert: ‘I think the full details are in this month’s issue of Heavy-Handed Metaphor Magazine.’ Photograph: YouTube

Late-night hosts discussed the state of affairs after both sides came to an agreement to stop a shutdown.
Stephen Colbert: ‘Just ask his tennis shorts’
On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert spoke about what’s happened since those in the government have been able to get back to their jobs. “Trump got back to the important work of trolling a CNN reporter,” he said while talking about the president’s tweet calling Jim Acosta “crazy”.
It’s been reported that a major aim of the Republican party is to now keep Trump contained. “That’s not easy,” he said. “Just ask his tennis shorts.”
One of the strangest stories to have come out in the past few days is that of Senator Susan Collins’ talking stick which was used to help restore order during heated discussions. In an interview on CNN, Collins claimed it was from Africa. “As lawmakers discussed immigration and the future of our government, the only minority in the room was a stick,” Colbert joked.
But apparently at one moment, the stick was thrown and almost shattered a glass elephant. “A heated discussion almost destroyed the symbol of the Republican party,” he said. “I think the full details are in this month’s issue of Heavy-Handed Metaphor Magazine.”
Trevor Noah: ‘What the hell, Susan Collins?!’
On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah was also fascinated by news of the talking stick. “Whoa, whoa, whoa, wait a minute. You had a magic stick that made senators work together the whole time, and then you only bring it out after the shutdown? What the hell, Susan Collins?” he said. “You could have saved everyone so much stress.”
Noah then went on to make a strange comparison. “You know who Susan Collins reminds me of?” he said. “The Power Rangers. They spend the whole episode getting their ass kicked and then they become the giant robot. Just be the robot from the beginning!”
He also took issue with Collins’ statement about the stick’s heritage. “We don’t use talking sticks in Africa,” he said. “I feel like Susan Collins just got bamboozled by some guy on the street.”
Seth Meyers on Jeff Sessions’ ‘pot of gold’
On Late Night with Seth Meyers, the host spoke about Robert Mueller’s investigation finally reaching a member of Trump’s inner circle: Jeff Sessions. “Despite Mueller’s tenacity, he said he wouldn’t disclose the location of ‘my pot of gold’,” he joked.
Meyers also brought up recent reports that the president had an affair with a porn star called Stormy Daniels. “Following reports that Trump carried on an affair with a porn star following the birth of his youngest son, the head of the Conservative Family Research Council said in a new interview that Trump deserves a ‘do-over’,” he said. “OK, but I doubt she’d still be into it.”
It’s been reported that Netflix lost $39m last year from costs incurred over Kevin Spacey projects that had to be cancelled because of allegations over sexual abuse. “And that’s not even including all of the money they lost on the Jerry Sandusky Christmas Special,” he said.
 Topics
