HPV vaccine rates higher in poor and Latino communities, study finds
Since 2006, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have recommended that girls aged 11 or 12 get the HPV vaccination. Photograph: David Cheskin/PA

Rates for the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine in the US are highest in communities that are predominantly Latino and poor, according to a report released Thursday that depicts a sharp turn in public health trends.
In high poverty communities, 61.1% of girls were given the first shot in the series, compared with 52.4% in low poverty communities, according to the American Association for Cancer Research’s report, the first to look at geography in relation to HPV vaccination rates. 
“You’re finding everything is inverse essentially,” said Kevin Henry, lead author of the study, which is being published in Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention. “You’re finding that the wealthier people have less vaccination yet they have more resources so in some respects they should be higher.”
The HPV vaccination rate was found to be higher among black people, American Indian/Alaska natives and Latinos compared with caucasian and Asian people. And girls whose families live below the poverty line also started taking the vaccination more frequently than women above the poverty line.
This is unusual because underserved communities typically have limited access to healthcare and take up public health initiatives like preventive screenings and immunizations at a lower rate.
HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection in the US and is associated with cervical, vulvar and vaginal cancers. Since 2006, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have recommended that girls aged 11 or 12 get the three-series vaccination.
Hispanic women have higher rates of cervical cancer than any other race, but Henry said this did not explain the disparity. “It’s different if no one in the wealthier groups gets cervical cancer, but in fact all the groups do get cancer,” said Henry, an assistant professor at Temple University and member of Fox Chase Cancer Center’s cancer prevention and control program.
Dr Jane Delgado, president of the nonprofit National Alliance for Hispanic Health, said she was “thrilled” by the results.
Her group organizes local HPV vaccination outreach efforts with materials, publications and helplines. 
“When we did focus groups with mothers the mythology was ‘Oh Hispanic parents, they don’t want to think of their daughters having sex,’ but you know what, Hispanic parents want to protect their girls from cancer,” Delgado said. 
Most of the Hispanic population was born in the US, but Delgado said that because most Latin American countries have nationalized healthcare, the community is less susceptible to the misguided stigma against vaccines. “In Latin America, very often, the idea of vaccines is very accepted,” Delgado said. 
But Delgado and Henry were quick to warn that vaccination rates for HPV are still low compared with what health workers hope for. 
Only 40% of teenage girls and 22% of teenage boys received all three doses of the vaccine in 2014, according to the CDC’s July 2015 report.
“We have this vaccine that essentially can prevent these cancers and yet the rates have been climbing very slowly, and we always talk about the war on cancer and will we be able to cure a cancer and essentially we’re skipping the part about curing it because we’re preventing it,” Henry said. “It’s very interesting when you have this vaccine available that will prevent it yet not everyone is using it.” 
The study results come from an analysis of the vaccination rates of more than 20,500 girls aged 13 to 17, whose information was collected in the National Immunization Survey-Teen in 2011 and 2012. Access to this data is protected by privacy laws so researchers cannot provide more incremental zip code data to show which specific communities are experiencing this trend. 
But one researcher noted that health advocates still face the challenge of getting people to complete all three shots in the series, which is necessary for the vaccine to be effective. 
Dr Daisy Morales-Campos, a research instructor at the Institute for Health Promotion Research at the UT Health Science Center at San Antonio, directs an HPV education campaign aimed at Latinos in south Texas. “We still see a lot of barriers to access,” Morales-Campos said.
She said people there often do not have the transportation needed to easily travel to a clinic, especially three times, and that many people rely on nurse clinics, which usually close before the school day ends. Sometimes, clinics do not have the vaccine in stock. 
The initiation rate is high in Hidalgo County for low-income Hispanic male and female children, but the rates for completion are much lower. “Although initiation is high, many children are not completing the series,” Morales-Campos said. 
Parents criticized the HPV vaccine when it was first released because they said the FDA’s recommendation encouraged girls to have sex at a young age, while advocates maintained that the intention was to get girls vaccinated before they become sexually active. 
The vaccine is supported by the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family Physicians, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
 Topics
