Future of news lies in the grassroots | Dan Kennedy
The State of the News Media report tells us about the major players – but the most vibrant journalism occurs at a local level 
One morning last October I found myself sitting in the office of Michael Morand, an associate vice-president of Yale University. We were talking about the New Haven Independent, a non-profit website that has been covering the hell out of the city's neighborhoods since 2005.
The Independent's readership is small – about 70,000 unique visitors a month, according to the founder and editor, Paul Bass. Was that enough, I asked Morand, for the Independent to matter? Were the "right" people reading it?
"That can be a loaded word, obviously," Morand replied. "But virtually all the right people are reading it – active voters, elected and appointed officials, opinion-makers, civic activists. Absolutely."
I thought about that conversation – and about Bass and his three full-time reporters, riding around New Haven on their bicycles carrying notebooks and cheap digital cameras – when the Project for Excellence in Journalism's annual State of the News Media report came out on Monday.
 
Both the New York Times and the Washington Post carried stories about the report, which found that nearly all of the online news audience is being funnelled into just a handful of megasites. Of 4,600 news sites, the report found, the largest 7% attracted 80% of the audience. The major players were sites affiliated with the cable news channels, national newspapers, big-name aggregators and a few creations of the internet age such as the Huffington Post and the Drudge Report.
Those findings weren't necessarily wrong. But large national and international news organisations exist in a different universe from the grassroots, where journalism is being reinvented. Just as technology has made competitors out of CNN and USA Today, so, too has it enabled others to make a living at the local level without having to invest in a printing press or sell out to a corporate-owned chain.
"I was probably unfairly disdainful of blogs. I didn't like that they didn't do reporting," Bass, a longtime New Haven journalist, told me in explaining what led him to launch the Independent. "But I was excited at the way that they were engaging with the readers in new ways and telling stories in new ways."
 
One way to think about the new media environment is that the handful of news sites singled out by the Project for Excellence in Journalism include the few with the resources to cover the truly big stories, from the battle over healthcare reform to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. It makes sense that most people are going to read those sites.
 
At the same time, though, there is a burgeoning localism movement in journalism that parallels such disparate phenomena as – I would argue – microbreweries, independent musicians, the movement for locally grown food and activists who fight against big-box national retailers.
 
As the Harvard scholar Robert Putnam observed in his 2000 book Bowling Alone, people who are involved in the life of their community are those who are also most likely to read the local newspaper. Sites like the Independent will thrive if they are able to flip the Putnam rule on its head – that is, if they are able to foster civic engagement and thus spark a rise in news consumption.
 
The annual State of the News Media report is a massive undertaking, and we'll be chewing it over for some time to come. Bill Mitchell of the Poynter Institute has written a worthwhile overview of its principal findings. There is, suffice it say, a lot more to it than the simple notion that the big are getting bigger.
But I think the authors underestimate the capacity for journalists to find new and, in some cases, better ways to do their work, even as traditional media continue their long twilight march.
Last summer I paid a visit to Howard Owens, a former top executive at GateHouse Media, now the owner and publisher of the Batavian, a small, for-profit website just east of Buffalo.
Owens, a San Diego native, has become an evangelist for localism in his adopted hometown; he sells T-shirts that say "Shop Local First" on the back. We met for breakfast at the Pok-A-Dot, a legendary greasy spoon, before talking in his second-floor office, overlooking downtown Batavia.
"Having strong, vibrant local communities are so important to a free society," Owens said. "And independent news sources that tie a community together are vital to that."
 
You can't survey a national audience and find out if they're reading the New Haven Independent or the Batavian – or Baristanet, in northern New Jersey, or Voice of San Diego or MinnPost or any one of the many hyperlocal news sites in existence, some thriving, some struggling to get by, some destined to fail.
The point is that national audience studies tell us little except what's happening at the very top of the news pyramid. What's happening at the bottom isn't just different, but it's also more interesting – and more relevant to the future of journalism.
 Topics
