How to use the Guardian University Guide
Illustration: Adam Avery

You can search for a specific course that interests you (for example, “genetics”). 
You can look at the table for the subject area it falls into (in this case, “biosciences”) and you can see how well each university does at teaching that subject.
But you need to know what all the columns in the table represent before you can make a judgment.
Key to the table headings
1. The Guardian ranking of the university
2. Name of university
3. The Guardian score out of 100 is a rating of excellence based on a combination of all the other factors
4. Course satisfaction is the percentage of final-year students satisfied with overall quality, based on the National Student Survey (NSS)
5. The teaching quality score is the percentage of final-year students satisfied with the teaching they received, based on the NSS
6. The feedback score is the percentage of final-years satisfied with feedback and assessment by lecturers, based on the NSS
7. Staff-student ratio is the number of students per member of teaching staff
8. Spend is the amount of money spent on each student, given as a rating out of 10
9. Average entry tariff means the typical Ucas scores of students currently studying in that department
10. The value-added score compares students’ individual degree results with their entry qualifications, to show how effective the teaching is. It is given as a rating out of 10
11. The career score is the percentage of graduates who find graduate-level jobs, or are studying further, within six months of graduation. It’s our way of ranking employability
All the columns are sortable. So if one of these items is particularly important to you – for example, employability – you can reorder the table to see which universities do best for that.
You might need to know a bit more about the subjects universities offer, because there’ll be lots that you didn’t encounter at school. Have a look at our subject profiles, which were all drawn up with the help of the academics who teach them. You’ll see what the job prospects are for each subject, and find out where students come from. The links to the subject profiles are at the top of each subject table.
If you click on the name of a university in the tables, it will take you to the university’s profile – you can read about what makes each institution special and get the info you need on fees, accommodation and bursaries. You’ll see how many students are male/female, and where they come from.
Next to each university’s name in the table, you will see a plus sign. Click on it to find out the courses it offers in the subject area that interests you.
The Guardian University Guide is different

Our guide is different from other guides you might come across on the web. Very few of them rank universities. We do, by carefully combining scores for the aspects of university life that matter most to students.
Students need to know how good the teaching is. Will they get regular feedback on their work? What do other students think of the course? And do they stand a good chance of finding a job when they graduate? Answers to all these questions are contained in our tables.
Other university league tables focus on research scores. We don’t, because they are of limited importance to students. We keep our eye firmly on what universities can do for you.
At some universities, there are so few students studying a particular course that we can’t include them in the statistics. Courses with small numbers of students are listed at the end of each table, but are not given a ranking. That should not be taken as any comment on their quality.
In compiling our tables, we have been advised by an expert review group of professionals from UK universities. The group meets regularly to monitor changes in subject areas and the way data is collected, and makes sure we produce the best possible guide.
The tables have been compiled for the Guardian by Intelligent Metrix, an independent consultancy that specialises in measuring performance in higher education. The rankings are based on official data collected by the Higher Education Statistics Agency (Hesa) and on the National Student Survey, published by Hefce.
If you want to know more about the methodology used to compile the tables, read the full explanation from Intelligent Metrix.
The tables compiler goes online the day of the launch to answer questions - here’s the live chat.
And if you’re the kind of person who likes raw data in spreadsheets to play around with, check out the spreadsheets – they have all the numbers you might want to crunch.
Good luck with finding your perfect course.
 Topics
