Kepos Street Kitchen's zucchini, sujuk and labneh omelette recipe
The couple behind Sydney’s popular Middle Eastern restaurants share the recipes they make at home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A perfect brunch or Sunday dinner: zucchini, sujuk and labneh omelette from Hummus & Co. Photograph: Alan Benson/Murdoch Books

Michael Rantissi and Kristy Frawley are the couple behind Sydney’s popular Kepos Street Kitchen and Kepos & Co restaurants. Their first cookbook Falafel for Breakfast, focused on the restaurants’ signature dishes. Their latest book, Hummus & Co, is full of the Middle Eastern recipes they make at home to share with their friends and family.
Zucchini, sujuk and labneh omelette
serves 4
This dish, which sits somewhere between an omelette and a frittata, is so easy to make and is excellent served for brunch or even a Sunday night dinner. I don’t think we celebrate the versatility of eggs enough – they are quick to prepare, nutritious and so much more than a breakfast food. 
The main ingredient in this dish is zucchini – and it may seem that there is a lot of it, but it helps to give the omelette its light, fluffy texture. The sujuk sausage adds a salty, spicy kick. 
800g zucchini, about 4 in total, coarsely grated
1 tbsp salt
100ml olive oil
200g sujuk sausage, diced
4 eggs
2 tbsp labneh, plus 4 tbsp extra to serve
3 tbsp chopped flat-leaf (Italian) parsley
2 large handfuls mixed herbs, such as chives, flat-leaf parsley, mint and coriander, leaves picked
70g pine nuts, toasted
Juice of ½ lemon
Put the grated zucchini in a bowl and sprinkle with the salt. Set aside until the zucchini releases its juices, about 15 minutes. Drain the zucchini, return to the bowl and set aside.
Preheat the oven to 180C.
Heat 2 tablespoons of the olive oil in a 24cm (9½ inch) ovenproof frying pan over medium–high heat. Fry the sujuk until crisp, then transfer to a plate and set aside. Leave the excess oil in the pan to cook the omelette.
Add the eggs, labneh, chopped parsley and half the crispy sujuk to the zucchini. Season with freshly ground black pepper and whisk to combine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Facebook Twitter Pinterest

Reheat the frying pan over medium heat. Pour in the egg mixture and cook for 2–3 minutes, then transfer the pan to the oven and cook for 10 minutes, or until the omelette is done to your liking. 
While the omelette is cooking, put the remaining crispy sujuk, mixed herbs, pine nuts, lemon juice and remaining olive oil in a bowl and toss to combine.
Flip the cooked omelette on to a plate and serve topped with dollops 
 of labneh and the sujuk and herb mixture.
This is an edited extract from Hummus and Co by Michael Rantissi and Kristy Frawley (Murdoch Books RRP $49.99/£20) Out now. Next week: the Kepos recipe for asparagus, pea and feta tart
 Topics
