Davos 2018: Theresa May and Donald Trump to meet - live updates
Miriam Elder (@MiriamElder) Davos getting ready for Trump pic.twitter.com/lnWNYp056N January 25, 2018

John McDonnell, Labour’s shadow chancellor, is also in Davos, and bringing a warning for the global elite:
McDonnell will be telling top business people and world leaders that they’re dangerously insulated from the problems outside WEF’s security cordon and swanky parties:
“Many of those attending the World Economic Forum have been patting themselves on the back as international growth figures have begun to pick up.
 “But they should be worried. In the real world, outside the Davos bubble of Alpine restaurants and chalets, the global economic system they have built isn’t working for billions of people. 
“And just as Davos faces the risk of an avalanche this week, growth for a few risks a political and social avalanche unless there is fundamental change to our rigged economic system.
Hammond: We must embrace AI, not fight it
Philip Hammond, the UK’s chancellor of the Exchequer, is also at Davos.
He’s been giving his views about artificial intelligence at a Microsoft breakfast, saying:
“We are at the point where computers move from being dumb and fast to being smart and fast.”
Hammond says AI is going to be disruptive and managing the process is
the key to it being accepted, warning:
“To many it will seem to be a big threat to their prosperity and livelihoods”.
Losers would include members of the middle class but it was important to embrace the new technology rather than resist
it.
“Let’s not create a generation of 21st Century Luddites who feel the only chance of survival is to resist change.”
Hammond said AI would affect the jobs market, would disrupt business
models and had ethical dimensions including privacy and the way new
technology could be used in wars.
“The choice is simple: do we look inward or outward, look to the future or cleave to the past?”
Updated at 2.29am EST
 
The agenda: May and Trump to meet
Good morning from Davos.
It’s another big day at the World Economic Forum, with Theresa May giving a keynote speech this afternoon – and meeting Donald Trump on the sidelines.
The UK PM is expected to put technology giants under pressure to clean up their act and tackle extreme content.
She’ll say:
Investors can make a big difference here by ensuring trust and safety issues are being properly considered. And I urge them to do so.
These companies simply cannot stand by while their platforms are used to facilitate child abuse, modern slavery or the spreading of terrorist and extremist content.”
Her meeting with Trump will be a chance to talk trade after Brexit, discuss terrorism, and perhaps patch up that Special Relationship after the row over the US embassy.
As Beth Rigby from Sky News puts it:
The two leaders are expected to focus on areas where there is common ground in international affairs: North Korea, as well as eradicating Islamic State in Syria and northern Iraq.
They might touch on Iran. But the thornier issue of Russian aggression in Europe is less likely to be raised as the Prime Minister seeks to soothe relations and not stoke further tensions.
President Trump set off for Davos last night - part of the biggest US delegation ever. We’ll be hearing more from his team this morning.
There’s also masses of other events, covering gender equality, financial stability, tax avoidance and climate change.
Here are some highlights coming up today
9am Davos (8am UK): Malala Yousafzai on girls education
9.15am Davos: Debate: could rogue technology kill us all? 
10.30am Davos: A speech by King Abdullah II of Jordan
11am Davos: Debate: How should leaders fighting climate change, with Greenpeace boss Jennifer Morgan and Al Gore
11am Davos: Debate: How to remake global finance, with IMF chief Christine Lagarde, chancellor Philip Hammond, US treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin, Larry Fink 
2pm Davos: Special address by prime minister Theresa May 
3pm Davos: Debate: Beyond the Paradise Papers: Can Global Tax Avoidance Be Stopped?
4pm Davos: A speech by Benjamin Netanyahu
6pm Davos: Are cryptocurrencies going to cause a financial crisis?
6.30pm Davos: A debate on global warming
