North Korean ice hockey players arrive in South as regime calls for unification
Women will form combined team for the Winter Olympics while Pyongyang says all Koreans must seek ‘breakthrough’ on unity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Korean ice hockey players arrive at the border crossing in Paju. Photograph: -/AFP/Getty Images

A delegation of North Korean officials and ice hockey players have crossed the heavily guarded border into South Korea for joint Olympics training, as Pyongyang called for all Koreans to seek unification of the two nations.
The delegation on Thursday included 12 North Korean players who will form a combined women’s ice hockey team with their southern counterparts at next month’s Winter Olympics in the South Korean mountain resort of Pyeongchang.
Under an agreement worked out during the first official talks between the two Koreas in two years, the joint team will wear unity jerseys and march under a unified peninsula flag at the Games’ opening ceremony on 9 February.
Earlier on Thursday, North Korea sent a rare announcement addressed to “all Koreans at home and abroad”, saying they should make a “breakthrough” for unification without the help of other countries, its state media said.
All Koreans should “promote contact, travel, cooperation between North and South Korea” while adding Pyongyang will “smash” all challenges against reunification of the Korean peninsula. 
The announcement, issued after a joint meeting of government and political parties, added Koreans should try to ease military tensions and create a peaceful climate on the Korean peninsula. 
North and South Korea remain technically at war after their 1950-53 conflict ended in a truce rather than a peace treaty. Tensions escalated dramatically last year as the regime of Kim Jong Un stepped up its programme aimed at developing a missile capable of striking the United States with a nuclear warhead. 
Some South Korean opposition politicians and conservatives have criticized Pyongyang’s participation in the games, saying Kim was using North Korea’s involvement for his own purposes. 
Many other South Korea welcomed the North’s participation, but complained that the unified women’s ice hockey team – the only such joint team – was unfair to the players.
Mike Pence, the US vice president, plans to use his attendance at the Winter Olympics in South Korea next month to try to counter what he sees as Kim’s efforts to “hijack” the games with a propaganda campaign, a White House official said on Tuesday. 
 Topics
