Deaf woman sues Little Mix concert promoter over sign language provision
A deaf woman is suing the promoter of a Little Mix concert alleging it failed to provide adequate sign language provision. 
Before attending the concert at Sussex’s South of England Event Centre last September, Sally Reynolds petitioned the organiser, LHG Live, to provide a British Sign Language (BSL) interpreter so that she and her two friends, who are also deaf, could enjoy the concert with their daughters, who are able to hear, the BBC reports.
Initially LHG offered Reynolds carer tickets and said she could bring her own interpreter. Citing the Equality Act 2010, which states that any organisation supplying a public service has a duty to make reasonable adjustments to ensure that a disabled person receives as similar as possible an experience to a person without a disability, Reynolds applied for a court injunction to oblige LHG to supply a BSL interpreter. 
Before the hearing, LHG agreed to provide an interpreter, who appeared during Little Mix’s set.
However the interpreter did not appear during supporting performances, by Ella Eyre and the Germein Sisters. Reynolds is now suing LHG for failing to make reasonable adjustments for the entire performance.
“People with sensory impairment actually want to attend musical and sporting events just as anybody else does,” her solicitor, Chris Fry, told the BBC. “So it is important that venues and promoters recognise the legal duties to make reasonable adjustments extend to them.”
In a statement, LHG Live said: “We consulted with [Reynolds’] recommended agency and agreed to provide the professional interpreter of her choice for the Little Mix show. This included specific staging and lighting, and a set list in advance.”
A spokesman for the band said: “Little Mix strongly believe their concerts should be completely inclusive for all. The band welcome all fans to their shows, including those with hearing impairment, and encourage the promoters they work with to make provisions to ensure their fans can enjoy the concert experience.”
Attitude is Everything, an organisation dedicated to improving deaf and disabled people’s access to live music, were unable to comment on the specificities of the case, but added: “We will be following the case highlighted today regarding BSL interpretation of concerts. We welcome Little Mix’s statement and will be consulting deaf audiences, artists and the industry to establish best practice in this area in 2018.”
