Minister faces pressure over men-only event as May voices disapproval
Nadhim Zahawi ‘dressed down’ by whip for attending dinner at centre of harassment claims
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nadhim Zahawi, the minister for children and families, was given a ‘dressing down’ by the Tory chief whip for attending the event. Photograph: David M Benett/Getty Images for Bell Pottinger

The government minister Nadhim Zahawi is facing more pressure over his attendance at an elite, men-only charity dinner, as Theresa May voiced her disapproval of the event in her first broadcast interview on the scandal.
The Presidents Club charity was forced to close after widespread outrage at the way some guests were reported to have groped and sexually propositioned women employed at last week’s event at the Dorchester hotel in London. The joint chair of the club David Meller was forced to stand down as a board member of the Department for Education as a result of his involvement. 
Zahawi, the minister for children and families, was given a “dressing down” by the Tory chief whip, Julian Smith, on Wednesday night, after he admitted having attended the event.
On Thursday the prime minister ducked questions about why Zahawi had attended the event. Interviewed by the BBC at the World Economic Forum at Davos, May said: “I understand that Nadhim Zahawi left early from that particular event. But when I read the report of that event that took place, frankly, I was appalled. I thought that sort of approach to women, that objectification of women was something that we were leaving behind.”
Asked again whether it was right for a government minister to attend, she said: “I’m not happy with an event of that type taking place. What worries me is that it is not just about that event; it is what it says about this wider issue in society about attitudes to women.” 
May’s spokesman said she would look into the issue of whether women working at the events were wrongly asked to sign non-disclosure agreements, or NDAs, requiring them to not report details of what took place inside – and left open the possibility of a wider review of their use.
The use of NDAs to prevent alleged victims from speaking has been a regular feature in sexual harassment stories that have emerged in recent months in the UK and US.
If you have been affected you can share your stories with us, anonymously if you wish, by using our encrypted form here. We will feature some of your contributions in our reporting.
Asked whether women should be told to not report harassment, the spokesman said: “Questions have been raised about the operation of non-disclosure agreements. The prime minister will look into the way these non-disclosure agreements are applied to see if changes are required.”
Questioned about details of what might change, or which department might lead on this, he said: “I’m not going to pre-empt the outcome of this. Issues have been raised and the PM will look into this.”
The spokesman also explained how a lunch with Boris Johnson came to be auctioned at the Presidents Club event, saying it was initially donated as a prize for another charity, set up by the former England cricketer Ian Botham, but that it was passed on without Johnson knowing.
Liam Botham, Ian Botham’s son, was among those listed as being invited to last week’s event.
The shadow education secretary, Angela Rayner, has written to the new education secretary, Damian Hinds, to demand further details of Zahawi’s attendance, including whether he used a ministerial car to travel to the event; and how he was surprised by its nature given that he had attended in previous years. 
Maria Miller, the Tory chair of the Commons select committee for women and equalities, put more pressure on Zahawi, saying he should have refused the invitation.
Speaking to ITV’s Good Morning Britain, she said: “No government minister should be going to an event where women are only there as the entertainment. That’s not acceptable. There are questions about why Nadhim had accepted this invitation.”
Zahawi has declined requests for interviews, but writing on Twitter he condemned the behaviour at the event and claimed he left at 9.35pm after feeling “uncomfortable”.
Nadhim Zahawi (@nadhimzahawi)I have been consistent Steve. I told No10 and friends that I arrived at 8pm and left at 9:35pm as I felt uncomfortable. I did not see any of the horrific events reported by the FT. I am shocked by them and condemn them unequivocally.
The Labour MP Jess Phillips, who raised an urgent question in the Commons on Wednesday about the event, said Zahawi should have expressed concerns at the time. 
Jess Phillips (@jessphillips)Rather than a dressing down how about a dressing up, perhaps walk up to downing Street wearing black bra and knickers in a pair of black high heeled shoes. https://t.co/Sw1QXrCJPB
Margot James, the minister for digital and creative industries, who criticised the dinner as an event for “slimeballs”, said she was satisfied with Zahawi’s explanation of what had happened. 
Speaking to BBC’s Newsnight programme, she said: “I’ve spoken to him. I wanted to get the facts. He went home very shortly after the hostesses were announced by the presenter and paraded around the room. That indicates to me that he was shocked by the events, didn’t like the culture, the atmosphere, and left.” 
A number of charities, including Great Ormond Street Hospital Children’s Charity, that have benefited from the £20m raised by the Presidents Club over more than 30 years said they would refund previous donations in the wake of the allegations.
The Charity Commission said it was looking into the allegations “as a matter of urgency”.
The Dorchester hotel said it was not aware of any claims following the event and an investigation had been launched.
A spokesman for the Artista agency, which recruited the hostesses, said: “I was not aware of any claims of sexual harassment, but the kind of behaviour alleged is completely unacceptable. I am checking with the staff and any complaints will be dealt with promptly and fairly.” 
The culture secretary, Matt Hancock, told Sky News that if he had been invited he would not have attended. Asked about Zahawi, he said: “I understand he went because it was a charity fundraiser and that he left early because he felt uncomfortable. I’m glad that the club has closed down, but it is part of a bigger change that we need to see to make sure we have genuine equal opportunities, and this sort of thing doesn’t happen.”
 Topics
