Prince Charles exudes divine right to rule, but apathy may be his saving grace
The committed and the curious line up to see the royals in Sydney, but the floating voters will decide whether the future monarch will reign over Australia

A lone palm tree swayed above the headquarters of the New South Wales mounted police unit. Higher still, a police chopper circled. Humidity mingled with the stench of horse manure. Charles and Camilla had come to Sydney.
Another day, another event, another line up of dignitaries. On Thursday it was the state’s deputy premier, Troy Grant, and the police commissioner, Andrew Scipione. The royal pair entered, the prince in the lead, giving the usual handshakes, the chitchat.
There is an aura around Charles. Whether in the way he greets delegates or chats with the public, or even just stands: his every gesture exudes a bone-deep belief in the natural authority of the crown. 
Slavoj Žižek memorably described the 2010 film, The King’s Speech, as a man’s descent into madness. As he saw it, Colin Firth’s royal was wiser at the film’s opening, when he couldn’t possibly comprehend his God-given right to rule. 
Later, after the obligatory montage, he admonishes his Australian voice coach for sitting in the throne. It is his alone, he roars, “because I am a king by divine right!” Call it a kind of delusion, or divinely ordained. Whatever it is, Charles has it. (Camilla doesn’t.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prince Charles chats with other guests during a reception at government house in Sydney on Thursday. Photograph: Reuters

After a brief tour of the stables and unit’s museum, the prince and duchess settled into the menage, a small parade ground, in which eight sleek horses stood at attention. They trotted in formation, charged at the audience, marched calmly in the face of trainers shouting and waving pool noodles.
Later, the prince and duchess entered the arena to inspect the beasts and meet their riders. One by one they gently tugged noses, ran their hands through manes. “Horses respond differently to people based on their emotional state,” one of the MCs had said earlier. “They don’t see the outside of people, they see what’s inside.” 
A couple of the horses bobbed their heads impatiently, another stamped its hooves; most, like their royal guests, calmly performed their duty. Everyone understood the brief: an old-fashioned institution, dearly loved by some, putting on a show for the cameras.
At Martin Place that afternoon, royal subjects stood 10-deep at the barricades. It was Sydneysiders’ only chance to see the future king. A poll on Thursday morning suggested his reign could be a brief one: 51% preferring an Australian head of state. 
Canny young monarchists weaved through the crowd handing out Australian flags stapled to business cards. “These flags are distributed free of charge by the Australian Monarchist League,” they read. “We stand for the cause of liberty under the crown.”
Who turns out in 2015 to see Prince Charles? First, the committed royalists. In this first category was Chris, who wore the Queen’s visage on his T-shirt, which he had picked up in London during the diamond jubilee.
“It was a thrill,” he said of his brief glimpse of the prince. “He will be the king of England one day.” But maybe not king of Australia, he conceded, “if you believe the media reports”.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staunch monarchist Chris, in Martin Place on Thursday to see Prince Charles. Photograph: Michael Safi/Guardian Australia

Second were sightseers like Andrew. “I wouldn’t say we’re staunch monarchists,” he said, granddaughter perched on his shoulders. “Just interested in seeing royalty. It’s a chance for the very young ones to see someone from the royal family.”
Any question of the republic was up to the next generation to decide, said Andrew. “It’s something the kids should understand,” he said. “They’ll make informed decisions about it later on.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrew with his granddaughter at Martin Place on Thursday. ‘[We’re] just interested in seeing royalty.’ Photograph: Michael Safi/Guardian

(A handful of people, firmly in this second category, migrated to the TV stages after Charles had left for another celebrity encounter: selfies with Nine newsreader Peter Overton.)
The third category hadn’t really turned out for Charles at all, but rather ventured out on doomed lunch missions and were caught in the throngs. It was perhaps this third group – filled with old-fashioned Australian apathy – that will decide the fraught question of Australian sovereignty. Their answers hinted at the republican movement’s biggest hurdle.
“I don’t dislike them,” one young woman, Marie, said.
“Yeah,” her friend Colette shrugged. “They’re harmless, hey.”
 Topics
