Life and style
Despite what you may have read in the furore surrounding Johann Hari’s new book, it’s very dangerous to stop antidepressants without professional advice 
 
 
 
 
 Antidepressants: Please, PLEASE, do not just abandon your meds! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Models at Dior’s haute couture show in Paris were emblazoned with words across their collarbones – but the dubious inspiration may have already sparked regret 
 
 
 
 From André Breton to William Blake: are quote tattoos no longer naff? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A growing movement of animal anti-vaccine advocates claim that immunising cats and dogs can cause a range of diseases and disorders – including autism 
 
 
 
 
 The anti-vaxxers have a new target in their sights – pets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In a new series Poppy Noor discusses an issue concerning how we can build happy, well-run communities. But what do you think? Send us your thoughts and responses 
 
 
 
 How can I stay close to my friends when they are all moving away? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jason Gallant captures the lake views, colonial architecture and colourful street vendors of this Central American traveller’s favourite 
 
 Instagram journey through Guatemala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This traditional dish is the ultimate comfort food – quick and easy, with a twist for added indulgence 
 
 
 
 Tom Aikens’s macaroni cheese with basil and garlic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mountainous Kumano is the holy ground of Japan and pilgrims have been trekking there for centuries. Shrines, mist, forests and waterfalls combine to create an entrancing hike 
 
 
 
 Stairway to heaven: hiking ancient pilgrimage trails in southern Japan 
 
 
 
 Bright and zingy, yet warm and comforting, this suety, syrupy pudding is British stodge at its very best 
 
 
 
 The perfect... Sussex pond pudding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heston’s bacon-and-egg ice-cream helped make his name. Now, flavours such as stilton, Twiglet and smoked salmon are cropping up at ice-cream parlours. Are they better than they sound? 
 
 
 
 Scoop of stilton, anyone? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As stuffing or seasoning, the Scottish delicacy is a beautiful thing 
 
 
 
 Nigel Slater’s haggis recipes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Haggis, neeps and tatties don’t taste the same without a wee dram to toast Scotland’s most famous poet, says David Williams 
 
 
 
 Wines and whisky for Burns Night 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Add borscht, caldo verde or chestnut and bacon soup to your repertoire 
 
 
 
 Six of the best winter soup recipes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Italian kitchen diary The ingredients may be few, but the flavour is plentiful – and it’s all about the tinned tomatoes 
 
 
 
 Rachel Roddy’s winter tomato sauce recipe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crispy, seedy, crunchy and creamy, a winter winter full of warmth and health. By Nigel Slater 
 
 
 
 Cauliflower slices with horseradish recipe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A fifth of 11- to 16-year-olds would be happy to have a web-only relationship. But for adults, real life is where the magic starts, writes Daisy Buchanan 
 
 
 
 
 Don’t fall for online-only love. It’s not the giddy real thing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The first ‘minister for loneliness’ has just been appointed to tackle a problem that seems more common by the day. We talk to people who were seriously lonely, but discovered ways to break free – including saying yes to every invitation 
 
 
 
 Feeling lonely? Meet the people who suffered extreme isolation – then found happiness 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 It’s hard to keep up with what constitutes good social media etiquette and what looks like flirting. Here’s a quick guide to avoiding accidental infidelity online 
 
 
 
 Suggestive emojis and deep likes: a guide to micro-cheating 
 
 
 
 These days, no Instagram post or fashion show is complete without a liberal sprinkling of glitter. But questions surround its environmental impact – and role in child slavery. Is it time to stop? 
 
 
 
 Losing its sparkle: the dark side of glitter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An aggressive synth soundtrack accompanied scowling models in world’s oldest antiques market 
 
 
 
 Vetements raises the heartbeat at Paris fashion week 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From the Golden Globes black-dress-code protest to Kim Jong-un’s suits and Meghan Markle’s M&S jumper, fashion is the news channel to watch 
 
 
 
 Power dressing: why fashion has never been so important 
 
 
 
 Informed consent is a tenet of a good doctor-patient relationship, particularly when it comes to the elderly 
 
 
 
 
 To treat or not to treat: find out what really matters to the patient 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As eating raw fish has become more popular, gruesome tapeworm tales have emerged. But how worried should sashimi lovers be – and how else might we become infected? 
 
 
 
 How the sushi boom is fuelling tapeworm infections 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A study at the University of Nottingham has shown that blood drains from someone’s face when they are under stress. Here are the other bodily signs to look out for 
 
 
 
 A cold nose shows you’re stressed – what else does? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We asked you to recommend the best ways to reduce your plastic consumption and avoid excess waste. Here’s what some of you said 
 
 
 
 
 Is it possible to live without plastic? Readers' tips for tip-free living 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mindfulness helps us deal with the stress of climate trauma, and seek solutions. Make sure your kit’s sustainably sourced and exercise outside, says Lucy Siegle 
 
 
 
 The eco guide to yoga 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In these times of relentless profligacy – when many of us have never learned or long forgotten the art of repairing – we offer a guide on how to sew, patch, darn and iron your way to prolonging the life of your wardrobe, so that you may think twice before that sale purchase today 
 
 
 
 Beyond Black Friday: 12 ways to care for your clothes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Veja trainers are beloved of Emma Watson, beloved by the sneakerheads who frequent Dover Street Market and draw crowds in Paris. They are a lesson in how sustainable clothing can also be cool 
 
 
 
 Green age kicks: how ethical trainers won the fashion seal of approval
