Inequality
As political and business leaders gather for their annual summit on the global economy, we want to know what key step you think they should prioritise to tackle inequality 
 
 
 
 Project Davos: what's the single best way to close the world's wealth gap? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Black students are 1.5 times more likely to drop out than their white and Asian counterparts. Understanding why is vital 
 
 
 
 Why do black students quit university more often than their white peers? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Europe’s first national experiment in giving citizens free cash has attracted huge media attention. But one year in, what does this project really hope to prove? 
 
 
 
 Money for nothing: is Finland's universal basic income trial too good to be true? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hidden from view, tents and old caravans are dotting the UK’s landscape this winter, as more and more people are forced to live rough in our woods and fields 
 
 
 
 What's behind the quiet rise of homelessness in the countryside? 
 
 
 
 Veronica G Cardenas photographed life on the freight train where Central Americans band together to make the brutal 20-day journey through Mexico 
 
 
 Aboard 'the beast': migrants' daring train ride through Mexico – in pictures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The 276 monuments marking the US-Mexico border were erected in 1848. David Taylor, an Arizona-based artist and professor, photographed them all 
 
 Forget the fence: these are the real markers of the US-Mexico border – in pictures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 They’ve survived single parenthood, housing shortages and a devastating fire to build what they have today: Ocupação Esperança, a space in São Paulo where women are in charge and the poor are protected 
 
 Occupation Hope: the DIY district ruled by women – in pictures 
 
 Play Video 
 
 
 
 
 Take the 1,000 most powerful people in Britain. How many are not white? Leah Green delves into the data on representation at the top of British society. From politics to law, charities, sport, business, the media and the military, the gatekeepers at the top of British society are overwhelmingly white
 
 
 The colour of power: why is the British establishment so white? – video 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oxfam calls for action on gap as wealthiest people gather at World Economic Forum in Davos 
 
 
 
 Inequality gap widens as 42 people hold same wealth as 3.7bn poorest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Heather Stewart and Anushka Asthana discuss the cabinet shake-up, plus Sonia Sodha, Torsten Bell and Neal Lawson on the concept of a universal basic income 
 
 May's reshuffle and universal basic income – Politics Weekly podcast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In 2017 inequality was highlighted like never before. Now we need to open our political imaginations to determine what a more equal world really is 
 
 
 
 
 Inequality is under attack - but what should equality really look like? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Unemployment is high in the Johannesburg township, but the band TCIYF are a surprising, positive influence for disenfranchised young people 
 
 
 
 ‘We rebel against the system’: inside Soweto’s thriving punk scene 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Minehead has the oldest population in England, Manchester the youngest. What do they tell us about the way we live now? 
 
 
 
 'Older people have pulled up the ladder': inside England's oldest and youngest towns 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 UK national lottery operator considers shift in focus to entice younger generation wanting to get on to housing ladder 
 
 
 
 Camelot mulls £10k-a-month-for life lottery prize to attract young 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The only way many young people can buy a home is by borrowing from family. But is it healthy – and what if parents can’t help out? 
 
 
 
 The bank of Mum and Dad: ‘It’s such a huge amount of money. And guilt’
