George Galloway accuses BBC over Question Time 'set-up'
MP angered at audience member’s question relating to a rise in antisemitism in the UK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
George Galloway claims Question Time host David Dimbleby later apologised to him after he faced a question relating to antisemitism. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images

George Galloway has hit out at the BBC following his appearance on Question Time, saying he was set up and that David Dimbleby privately apologised to him afterwards.
The controversy centred around a question that one audience member asked about a rise in antisemitism in the UK.
But the question also included a reference to the MP for Bradford West bearing some responsibility for this rise, an inclusion he said that had not been agreed beforehand.
The anti-war politician said the host David Dimbleby later apologised to him for this, but it represented what he said was a set-up within the BBC.
“A lot of people are very unhappy about it as it was a set-up,” he said.
“It was very poorly chaired by a man I admire but who let himself down immensely. It showed the opposition in a very bad light and I don’t know who was advising them.
“It is defamatory and worse and it was not the question that was asked. The question that was tabled and agreed was not the question that was asked.
“He added his own words and David Dimbleby should have stopped and re-shot that question, as it’s not a live show.
“David Dimbleby apologised to me afterwards for the man adding on that bit, but he should have made it clear to the audience that this trick had been played and not just apologise afterwards.
“To accuse a parliamentarian of 27 years of being responsible for a spike in antisemitism is totally ludicrous.”
He also took issue with the make-up of the audience, saying there was not a single Muslim among them, despite there being many in the borough – Finchley in north London – where it was filmed.
Fellow panel member and Guardian columnist Jonathan Freedland also did not escape the Respect party MP’s ire, as he said he had stoked the fires and for that he would never forgive him.
“There was not a single Muslim person in the audience even though there are 50,000 Muslims in the borough,” he said.
“Jonathan Freedland was the prosecutor-in-chief, he lit the touch paper and then smugly retired and for that I will never forgive him.
“Any antisemitic attack of any kind is utterly despicable but there are at least ten times the number of attacks on mosques. Mr Freedland claimed there had been 1,000 attacks on Jews but there have actually been 84.
“The impression was given that people are roaming around the UK looking for Jews to attack but far more people are walking around Britain looking for Muslims.”
Freedland said: “I certainly did not set out to prosecute George Galloway. I simply pointed out that he has in the past inflamed an already tense issue by making wild, unfounded accusations – a point he did not address. I too was disappointed at the way some in the audience behaved. As some viewers saw, I wanted them to respect George Galloway’s right to make his case.
“I did not ‘smugly retire’: I wanted to speak again but was not given that chance. If I had, I would have repeated my long-standing condemnation of Islamophobia and objected to some of the attitudes voiced by members of the audience. On the numbers, the Community Security Trust report showed more than 1168 antisemitic incidents last year, the highest ever figure. Still, Jews and Muslims are not in competition over who is hated most: that’s not a competition anyone would want to win.”
The BBC later said in a statement: “We are satisfied the programme was conducted appropriately and fairly. 
“Each week Question Time aims to have an audience that reflects the ethnic make-up of the area where we are filming, as well as being politically balanced. 
“This week’s audience was no different and included people from a range of different faiths.”
 Topics
