Tom Kerridge’s spicy Moroccan lamb burgers
A lamb patty that mixes English mustard with ras el hanout for an exciting, spicy and easy-to-make treat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tom Kerridge’s Moroccan lamb burger. Photograph: Cristian Barnett

This lamb burger is an amazing midweek supper as it’s easy to make and its spice makes it exciting and interesting to eat. You get a great flavour from the combination of English mustard, cinnamon, ras el hanout (a north African spicy seasoning that really complements lamb), cumin and mint, and you get freshness from the harissa-laced fat-free yoghurt sauce.
Although it’s a protein-led recipe, the grated carrot and courgette means you can eat a much bigger burger that is still lower calorie, and, because of those nice, juicy vegetables, it’s moist and flavoursome. If you’re on a low-carb diet, just leave out the bun and serve with a salad.
(Serves 4)
For the lamb burgers
1 large courgette, grated 
100g carrot (about 1 large), peeled and grated 
500g lean lamb mince (20% fat)
1 tsp bicarbonate of soda
1 large free-range egg, lightly beaten
30g fresh breadcrumbs 
1 tbsp English mustard 
1 tsp ground cinnamon 
1 tbsp ras el hanout
1 tsp salt
1 tsp ground cumin 
2 tsp dried mint
Freshly ground black pepper 
Sunflower oil spray
For the harissa yoghurt
6 tbsp Greek yoghurt (0% fat) 
2 tsp rose harissa paste
To serve
4 large wholemeal burger buns 
1 large tomato, thickly sliced 
2 little gem lettuce, leaves separated
Method
Squeeze out any extra moisture from the grated courgette and carrot, then place in a bowl with all the other burger ingredients (apart from the oil), adding a generous grinding of pepper. Mix together thoroughly.
Divide the mixture into four portions and shape into large, fairly thin burger patties. Chill in the fridge for as long as time allows (or overnight, if you’re organised, for an even faster meal).
When you’re ready to cook your burgers, mix together the yoghurt and harissa and set aside. Halve and toast the wholemeal burger buns.
Preheat the grill to high. Spray a baking tray a few times with oil and place the burgers on the tray. Spray the top of each burger a few times with oil. Cook under the hot grill for 5–6 minutes on each side, until nicely browned.
Spread the harissa yoghurt on the bottom of each burger bun, add a burger, then top with a tomato slice and some lettuce. Pop the lid on and tuck in.
This recipe is from Lose Weight for Good by Tom Kerridge, published by Absolute. To buy for £18.70 (RRP £22) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 Topics
