Inside Politics with John King, Monday - Friday 12:00pm ET & Sundays 8:00am ET - CNN
Monday - Friday 12:00pm & Sundays 8:00am
Anchored by CNN Chief National Correspondent John King, 'Inside Politics' features the top political stories sourced by the best reporters.
Show Description

CNN poll: Oprah, Biden, Sanders trounce Trump
It's early--very early--but a new CNN poll shows Pres. Trump losing big to former VP Joe Biden, Sen. Bernie Sanders, and Oprah Winfrey. CNN's John King says Democrats shouldn't make bets just yet. 

Sessions interviewed in Russia probe
In the latest development in the Russia meddling investigation, Special Counsel Robert Mueller's office interviewed Attorney General Jeff Sessions last week.

Schumer "went with his heart...not with his head"
CNN's Dana Bash and Jeff Zeleny break down how Minority Leader Schumer moved away from his original demands and towards a compromise to reopen the government.

Trump's ever-shifting positions frustrate leaders on both sides of the aisle
After a week of failed negotiations resulted in a government shutdown, leaders in both parties were left frustrated by the president's shifting positions.

John McCain's continued Senate absence
Questions on when Sen. John McCain will return to the Senate, the latest on an anticipated Senate run by Mitt Romney, Republicans' difficult tax plan sell, the long history of efforts to pass the DREAM Act, and the possible motivation behind Steve Bannon's 'Fire and Fury' comments--it's all on Inside Politics. 

MAGIC WALL: Trump's campaign promise report card
CNN's John King breaks down where Trump's big campaign promises stand one year into his presidency.

CNN Poll: Democratic lead over GOP narrows
As the midterm election year begins, a new CNN poll conducted by SSRS finds the Democratic advantage on a generic congressional ballot has tightened to a narrow 5 points among registered voters, but those voters who say they are most enthusiastic about turning out to vote this fall favor Democrats by a wide 15-point margin.

Schumer in the WH at Trump's request
Trump invites Senate Minority Leader Schumer to a meeting at the White House hours before a government shutdown. Majority Leader McConnell is not in attendance.

Trump touts anti-abortion policies in speech
President Trump speaks in the White House rose garden to participants in the March for Life.

Trump to campaign in Pennsylvania
The President travels to Pennsylvania ahead of a special election. CNN's John King is at the magic wall breaking down what that district means for Trump and for 2018.

Where does Trump stand on immigration?
His views have "evolved," says Chief of Staff John Kelly. Majority Leader McConnell adds that he and the GOP are "spinning [their] wheels" until Trump decides what he wants.

Hours before shutdown, Trump tweet creates confusion
The WH releases a statement saying that Pres. Trump supports the GOP resolution to keep the government funded, after a morning tweet suggests he opposes it.

John King 
Anchor and chief national correspondent
John King is CNN's Chief National Correspondent and anchor of Inside Politics
