Consumer affairs | Money
25 January 2018
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Letters: Readers respond to the alleged groping and harassment of women at the Presidents Club charity auction 
 
 Despair and anger at the Presidents Clubbers 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Venice restaurant that hit tourists with £1,000 bill faces £17,000 fines 
 
 
 Venice restaurant that hit tourists with £1,000 bill faces £17,000 fines 
 
 
 Customers urged not to switch supply after Future Energy collapse 
 
 
 Customers urged not to switch supply after Future Energy collapse 
 
 
Your problems with Anna Tims Amazon Prime: how did I become an ‘accidental’ member? 
 
 
 Amazon Prime: how did I become an ‘accidental’ member? 
 
 
 Plastic waste: network of water refill points aims to tackle problem 
 
 
 Plastic waste: network of water refill points aims to tackle problem 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  24 January 2018
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Homeopathic 'scams' could be advertised on prime-time television 
 
 
 Homeopathic 'scams' could be advertised on prime-time television 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Your problems with Anna Tims Vet fees: beware of out-of-hours charges 
 
 
 Vet fees: beware of out-of-hours charges 
 
 
 
 
 
  23 January 2018
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer champions Why was I humiliated by Waitrose self-scan check? 
 
 The Quick Check system was quick and really good … until the security review 
 
 
 Why was I humiliated by Waitrose self-scan check? 
 
 
 
 
  22 January 2018
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fears for future of UK onshore wind power despite record growth 
 
 2.6GW of capacity built in 2017 before subsidies ban industry says will make generation dearer 
 
 
 
 Fears for future of UK onshore wind power despite record growth 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Think you can spot scammers? Just 9% of Britons really can 
 
 Home Office-backed campaign offers advice to help people protect themselves from fraud 
 
 
 Think you can spot scammers? Just 9% of Britons really can 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer champions Dyson V8: why is the pricing an Absolute farce? 
 
 Different models are priced far apart – the company should dust off its names 
 
 
 Dyson V8: why is the pricing an Absolute farce? 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ryanair: passengers fight for expenses if flights are delayed 
 
 Solicitor says dodging legitimate claims are not ‘isolated incident’ but ‘company policy’ 
 
 
 Ryanair: passengers fight for expenses if flights are delayed 
 
 
 
 
  20 January 2018
  
 Money talks 
 
 Boohoo says its ‘sale’ will end in minutes – why is it back in a couple of hours? 
 Patrick Collinson 
 
 Countdown clocks and phrases such as ‘hurry now’ are used to to panic shoppers into buying 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Boohoo says its ‘sale’ will end in minutes – why is it back in a couple of hours? 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tickets: is this the system to finally beat the touts? 
 
 
 Tickets: is this the system to finally beat the touts? 
 
 
You're the expert Should I shred my old bank statements? 
 
 
 Should I shred my old bank statements? 
 
 
 Why do supermarkets sell organic food wrapped in plastic? 
 
 
 Why do supermarkets sell organic food wrapped in plastic? 
 
 
How I spend it The Amazon worker: paid £18,000 a year to shift 250 items an hour 
 
 
 The Amazon worker: paid £18,000 a year to shift 250 items an hour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  19 January 2018
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 It's in the jeans: US fashion goes back to denim's glory days 
 
 Catwalk revival of old styles immortalised by Hollywood stars sees surge in jeans market 
 
 
 It's in the jeans: US fashion goes back to denim's glory days 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1m more smart meters which hinder switching could be rolled out 
 
 
 1m more smart meters which hinder switching could be rolled out 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Your problems with Anna Tims Ground rent: can landlords really demand six years’ payments in one hit? 
 
 
 Ground rent: can landlords really demand six years’ payments in one hit? 
 
 
 
 
 About 15,410 results for Consumer affairs
 1 2 3 4 … 771  
 
 next  
 
 Topics
  Consumer rights  
  Energy industry  
  Household bills  
  Energy bills  
  Ethical and green living
