Classical cover art: the good, the bad and the ugly
Matching music with images is a tricky art in any genre. Classical has some remarkable examples, for better and worse, of how fine the balance can be.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Just plain weird.. . the unfortunate cover art of Cecilia Bartoli’s Sacrificium. Photograph: Public Domain

When classical music covers go wrong they really go wrong. There are some corkers out there, from the unfortunate Derek Bell Plays With Himself to Red Priest’s hair metal-style Handel in the Wind, with Julian Lloyd Webber’s Travels With My Cello and much else in between … so it’s gratifying to come across the rare instances when genuine creative thought has gone into the relationship between cover art and the music inside, whatever that might even mean in our ever-more post-product era of music consumption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover art by Denise Burt for Gudmunsen-Holmgreen’s Mixed Company Photograph: Public Domain

As a general rule, new music has fared better than most when it comes to the graphic and photographic inventiveness of sleeve designers – think of ECM or NMC covers, for example. In this feature at NPR, Denise Burt reveals her thinking behind eight of the 300 covers she has made. As we have discovered thanks to the National Gallery’s much derided Soundscapes exhibition, the business of relating image to music and vice versa is a subtle art. And when it comes to creating the image that accompanies the first recording of recent music, the risks and opportunities are at their most delicately balanced. 
It’s no trivial fact that our memories seem hardwired to imprint the association of image with music, for me these cover images of Mozart symphonies or Ferneyhough string quartets became part of the experience of the music in some indelible way. But that’s not always a good thing – check out this recording of Orff’s Carmina Burana). 
Burt’s thoughtfulness, imagination and visual variety is an insight into what can happen when label, composer and artist are working in creative synergy. I especially like what she came up with for Per Nørgard and Pelle Gundmundsen-Holmgreen, images that satisfy on their own terms but which intrigue and entice you to hear the music, the subtle balance that classical cover art should always try to achieve. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Die Walkure CD cover art Photograph: Public Domain

Here’s another reminder of what happens when it goes wrong: Die Walküre distilled, obviously, by judiciously placed VolksWagner hubcaps, an image that could and should rightly inspire a whole thesis of new-musicology post-feminist discourse. What did the music, the model, and even the hubcaps, do to deserve that?
 Topics
