Arsenal v Chelsea: Carabao Cup semi-final second leg – live!
Danny Welbeck and César Azpilicueta tussle as the deadlock goes unbroken in the first leg. Photograph: Matthew Impey/Rex/Shutterstock

Arsenal make four changes to the team named in the first leg at Stamford Bridge. In come Laurent Koscielny, Nacho Monreal, Mohamed Elneny and Mesut Özil; Calum Chambers and Ainsley Maitland-Niles drop to the bench, while Rob Holding and Danny Welbeck miss out altogether. New man Henrikh Mkhitaryan played in Manchester United’s quarter-final defeat at Bristol City, so has to wait to make his debut for the Gunners.
Chelsea also make four changes from the first leg. In come Willy Caballero, Tiémoué Bakayoko, Willian and Pedro; Danny Drinkwater drops to the bench, while Thibaut Courtois, Álvaro Morata and Cesc Fàbregas are all injured. Box-fresh signing Ross Barkley is on the bench and will be raring to start his Chelsea career tonight.
Preamble
This is the fifth meeting between Arsenal and Chelsea this season. So far, the Gunners have enjoyed the upper hand ... just. They won the Community Shield on penalties; eked out a draw in the Premier League at Stamford Bridge; scored a last-minute equaliser in the League at the Emirates; and held Chelsea again at their place in the first leg of this League Cup semi. Throw in last year’s FA Cup final, and it’s fair to say Chelsea are overdue something positive to take away from this intense rivalry.
You couldn’t fit a cigarette paper between the teams, though. Both thrashed struggling Premier League opposition at the weekend: Arsenal hit four in a 16-minute burst against Crystal Palace, Chelsea scored four on the road at Brighton & Hove Albion. But before those spirit-replenishing wins, neither team had won in five. Arsenal were knocked out of the FA Cup at Nottingham Forest and lost dismally at Bournemouth, while Chelsea registered three goalless draws on the bounce and required penalties to squeak past Norwich City in the cup. Form and confidence is at a premium. But it wouldn’t take much for both teams to snap back to their brilliant best, either.
All of which suggests this League Cup semi-final second leg is balanced on a knife-edge. “It has always been very tight ... it’s very unpredictable,” says Arsene Wenger, while Antonio Conte admits: “When you play against Arsenal, you must be prepared to suffer.” Good luck predicting the outcome of this, then. Who will make a date with Manchester City at Wembley on February 25? We might need extra time, and even penalty kicks, to find out. It’s on!
Kick off: 8pm GMT.
Updated at 10.36am EST
