The best new theme park rides of 2017
We've been turning blue in the face waiting for James Cameron to deliver on his promised "Avatar"sequels. In the interim, Disney has created Pandora – The World of Avatar, an entire jaw-dropping land devoted to the auteur's sci-fi universe. Steven Diaz, Disney
 But the highlight of Pandora is Avatar Flight of Passage. The attraction refines — and amps up — the flying theater concept used in Disney's Soarin' rides and delivers a captivating, exhilarating, and almost ethereal experience. Using impressive theme park trickery, visitors link to an avatar so that they can ride on the back of a winged banshee above Pandora's otherworldly vistas. Disney
 Prickly Disney fans were outraged — outraged! — when Disney's California Adventure announced it would be closing the Twilight Zone Tower of Terror and remaking it with a Guardians of the Galaxy theme. Then they rode it. Now it's one of the most popular attractions at the Disneyland resort's two parks. Richard Harbaugh, Disneyland Resort
 The faster-than-freefall drop tower remains with its scream-inducing plunges and airtime-filled ascents. But the thrills are punctuated with brief bursts of the Guardians' trademark chaos and giddy lunacy. It's all scored to an awesome mix of 60s and 70s tunes. Disneyland Resort
 Six Flags aspired to Disney- and Universal-league sophistication when it introduced its first Battle for Metropolis dark rides in 2015 at two of its parks. Six Flags Magic Mountain got a supersized version in 2017 that includes an extended pre-show experience, a new animatronic Harley Quinn character, and an extra scene with an alternate ending. It delivers even more of a wow factor. Six Flags Entertainment
 The year's most thrilling new ride isn't a roller coaster. It isn't even located at an amusement park or theme park. And it isn't a single ride that takes the top honors, but a trio of water slides at Volcano Bay, the new water park that opened at Universal Orlando in 2017. Universal Orlando Resort
 Riders need to ascend a lot of steps to reach the 125-foot level near the summit of the park's signature Krakatau Volcano. Once there, they have the choice of entering one of three launch capsules that share a world record for the tallest rides of their kind. Universal Orlando Resort
Last SlideNext Slide

Perhaps you've seen year-end retrospectives for the best movies, TV shows, music, and books. Before we bid adieu to 2017, let's take one last look back at a genre that often gets overlooked in the mix: theme parks.
It's an axiom within the industry that in order to thrive and keep enticing visitors through their turnstiles, parks need to constantly create new experiences. In 2017, they did just that with a spate of new lands, attractions, thrill rides, and more. Some of them were good. Others, not so much. A few, however, rose to the top. Let's cite the year's best achievements at theme parks and hail the attractions (along with the gifted people who created them) that transported visitors to incredible places — and thrilled them in the process.
Best new theme park attraction: Avatar Flight of Passage at Disney's Animal Kingdom in Florida
We've been turning blue in the face waiting for James Cameron to deliver on his promised Avatar sequels. In the interim, Disney has created Pandora – The World of Avatar, an entire jaw-dropping land devoted to the auteur's sci-fi universe. It's stuffed with wondrous elements, including towering mountains that float, flowers that improbably glow at night and create an unearthly atmosphere, and a boat ride that takes guests on a tranquil river journey to meet a 10-foot-tall shaman (who represents the next evolution in the animatronics artistry that Disney pioneered).
But the highlight of Pandora is Avatar Flight of Passage. The attraction refines — and amps up — the flying theater concept used in Disney's Soarin' rides and delivers a captivating, exhilarating, and almost ethereal experience. Using impressive theme park trickery, visitors link to an avatar so that they can ride on the back of a winged banshee above Pandora's otherworldly vistas. At first, the action is frantic (in a good way), but Disney reins in the thrills for a surprisingly blissful finale. With its exhibits and labyrinth grottoes, the queue is among parkdom's best — which is a good thing, since visitors often have to wait in an interminable line to board the popular ride.
Best update of an existing theme park attraction: Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: BREAKOUT! at Disney California Adventure in California
Prickly Disney fans were outraged — outraged! — when the Mouse House announced it would be closing the Twilight Zone Tower of Terror and remaking it with a Guardians of the Galaxy theme. Then they rode it. Now it's one of the most popular attractions at the Disneyland resort's two parks. The faster-than-freefall drop tower remains with its scream-inducing plunges and airtime-filled ascents. But the thrills are punctuated with brief bursts of the Guardians' trademark chaos and giddy lunacy. It's all scored to an awesome mix of 60s and 70s tunes.
Best clone of a theme park attraction: Justice League: Battle for Metropolis at Six Flags Magic Mountain in California
Six Flags aspired to Disney- and Universal-league sophistication when it introduced its first Battle for Metropolis dark rides in 2015 at two of its parks. Incorporating 3-D media, roving motion-base vehicles, animatronics, and interactive gaming, the attractions are super, man. The park chain has since been rolling out the rides at additional locations, including three in 2017. Six Flags Magic Mountain, however, got a supersized version that includes an extended pre-show experience, a new animatronic Harley Quinn character, and an extra scene with an alternate ending. It delivers even more of a wow factor.
Most thrilling ride: Water slides at Universal Orlando's Volcano Bay in Florida
The year's most thrilling new ride isn't a roller coaster. It isn't even located at an amusement park or theme park. And it isn't a single ride that takes the top honors, but a trio of water slides at Volcano Bay, the new water park that opened at Universal Orlando in 2017.
Riders need to ascend a lot of steps to reach the 125-foot level near the summit of the park's signature Krakatau Volcano. Once there, they have the choice of entering one of three launch capsules that share a world record for the tallest rides of their kind. The capsules' doors fly open to send passengers plummeting down 70-degree freefalls into the darkness. The Ko'okiri Body Plunge speed slide heads straight down the volcano, while the two Serpentine Body Slides take more winding routes. All three leaves sliders slack-jawed and breathless.
Best new roller coaster: Mystic Timbers at Kings Island in Ohio
2017 wasn't a banner year for roller coasters at American parks. The best of the bunch was the relatively low-profile Mystic Timbers, a fairly traditional wooden coaster. Other Kings Island thrill machines tower over the 109-foot ride and top its 53-mph speed. But the spunky woodie includes loads of airtime and plenty of thrills.
Mine Blower at Fun Spot America in Florida, another wooden coaster, takes the runner-up spot. The 82-foot-tall, 49-mph ride also features out-of-your-seat airtime along with a barrel roll inversion and a 115-degree overbanked curve.

 Visitors at Cedar Point have long railed against one of its thrill machines, Mean Streak, for its excessively rough ride. In 2018, however, the innovative ride designers at Rocky Mountain Construction will perform their latest transformation by converting the old wooden coaster into a wooden-steel hybrid that will be known as Steel Vengeance. Cedar Fair Entertainment Company
