Sen. Dick Durbin is still fighting to fulfill his promise to the 'original DREAMer'
CLOSE

 WARNING GRAPHIC LANGUAGE: Democratic Sen. Minority Whip Dick Durbin, who attended Thursday's meeting on immigration at the White House, called President Donald Trump's comments during the meeting, "hate filled, vile and racist." (Jan. 12) AP

WASHINGTON — When Sen. Dick Durbin first met Tereza Lee — then an undocumented teenager living with an unspoken, ever-present fear of deportation — the Illinois Democrat thought it would be easy to address her anguishing immigration status.
He called federal immigration officials and recounted the story of this budding piano prodigy from Chicago who wanted to go to college and live the American dream. Sorry, they said, Lee would have to be deported to Brazil — a country she’d left at the age of two with her parents — wait there for 10 years and then petition for reentry to the U.S.
“We’ve got to fix this,” Durbin thought.
That was 17 years ago. Now, Lee is known to some as “the original DREAMer.” And the spark she lit in Durbin’s heart in 2001 has become a raging national fire that has mobilized activists and paralyzed Congress.
At the center of the blaze is the Dream Act, which Durbin sponsored in 2001 to create a path to citizenship for young immigrants brought to the U.S. as children and now living here illegally. Those who would benefit from the Dream Act quickly became labeled "DREAMers."
What started out as a bipartisan bill eventually became a polarizing executive order —issued by President Obama and then rescinded by President Trump.
“When he first proposed the Dream Act, Durbin believed it would be a simple, commonsense and humane bipartisan action,” said Josh Hoyt, an immigration-rights activist who began working with Durbin on the issue in the early 2000s. “Now it’s dragged on for 17 years and has gotten to the point where it’s shut down the government.”
In recent weeks, Durbin has been the target of derogatory tweets from Trump and bitter complaints from disappointed DREAMers. And the real test is still ahead, as the Illinois Democrat tries to navigate the current immigration standoff and Lee watches intently from the sidelines hoping Durbin doesn’t lose his will.
The fate of the DREAMers was at the heart of last weekend’s government shutdown, and it remains the main sticking point as lawmakers try to negotiate a new agreement that will both keep the government open and prevent the DREAMers from being deported.
“He truly feels that this is his legacy, kind of his baby,” said Lee, now a 34-year-old American citizen, immigration-rights activist, and pianist studying for her doctorate at the Manhattan School of Music. Lee became a citizen through marriage in 2010.
Lee said part of her believes that Durbin will do whatever it takes to get the bill into law. But another part, she said, is burning mad that Durbin and other Democrats “caved in to the Republicans” and agreed to reopen the government without an agreement to protect the DREAMers.
“They should be powerful enough and courageous enough not to do that,” Lee said.
Lee knows something about courage. She was 7 years old when she learned that she was living in the United States illegally.
“My dad sat us down around the living room,” she recalled. “He said he had a very serious secret to tell us. We couldn’t say anything to anybody.”
Lee’s parents fled South Korea after the Korean War left them financially devastated. The couple moved to Brazil first and then to the U.S. when Lee was two. They arrived on tourist visas and stayed after those expired, with her mother working in a dry cleaners and her father serving as a pastor at a church on Chicago’s north side.
It was at her father’s church that she discovered the piano. “My dad forced me to learn a hymn a week,” she said. “By the time I was nine, I had memorized the entire hymn book.”
A wealthy parishioner bought her family a piano, and Lee started playing in — and winning — local competitions. In high school, she earned a scholarship to attend the Merit School of Music, a Chicago institution that provides musical training to low-income children.
Read more:
As Lee blossomed, Merit’s artistic director at the time, Ann Monaco, started asking about her college plans. Lee said she had no such plans.
“She printed out 10 college application forms, including to Juilliard, and asked me to fill them out,” Lee recalled. Lee brought them back to Monaco with her birthplace listed as Brazil and the Social Security number box empty.
When Monaco asked for an explanation, “I burst into tears and told her I was undocumented,” Lee recalled. She had never uttered that word to anyone outside her family, and she begged Monaco not to report her to the police. 
Monaco called Durbin, not the police. At the time, Lee thought she was alone in her immigration limbo. Durbin guessed there were others like her but didn’t realize how many — until he started talking publicly about her case.
One by one, other undocumented children started coming to him, often waiting by his car after events around Illinois.
“I’m one of those kids,” Durbin recalled of those hushed conversations. “I couldn’t imagine the stress and the strain they were under,” the senator said, as they literally came out of the shadows to ask for his help. 
"That's my idea"
When Durbin first crafted the Dream Act in 2001, he got a call from an irritated Republican, Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah. “What are you doing stealing my bill?” Hatch asked Durbin. “That’s my idea.”
Republicans were in the majority at the time, so Durbin decided to sign his name to Hatch’s proposal instead of pursuing his own. The first hearing was set for Sept. 12, 2001, and the two lawmakers had lined up strong bipartisan support.
Then came the Sept. 11 attacks. The hearing was canceled. The mood of the country shifted.
“People started to fear perceived outsiders,” Lee said. “People started to become very kind of closed to the immigrant communities.”
Durbin said it became more difficult for him to find GOP co-sponsors for the bill, as the Republican Party took a tougher line on immigration. Conservatives said the Dream Act was a Trojan horse for a broader "amnesty" bill that would grant legal status to millions of undocumented immigrants. 
Hatch said it became mired in “stupid politics,” and the Dream Act, along with broader immigration reform efforts, stalled year after year after year.
"He’s had his heart broken a number of times," Hoyt said of Durbin. "His interest in this is deeply personal ...He really believes that what’s happening with Dreamers is one of the most unfair things this country is doing."
The Dream Act came close to passing in 2013 as part of a comprehensive immigration reform bill, which cleared the Senate 68-32. But that bill included a path to citizenship for the nation’s 11 million undocumented immigrants.
House conservatives threatened to revolt if then-Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, called the Senate bill up for a vote.
The impasse prompted Obama — at the urging of Durbin and others — to issue an executive order in 2012, giving DREAMers the opportunity to apply for temporary legal status and work permits. Approximately 800,000 young immigrants signed up for the program, called Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals.
In reversing Obama’s order, Trump gave Congress until March 5 to address the status of the DREAMers — throwing an immigration time bomb into lawmakers’ laps where it’s gotten tangled up with an already treacherous spending debate. The three-day shutdown came after Durbin and other Democrats pushed unsuccessfully to attach a fix for the DREAMers to a spending bill to keep the government open. 
It ended when Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., promised Democrats he would allow open debate on an immigration bill by Feb. 8, when the next spending bill expires. Durbin said it would give lawmakers a chance to break the partisan stalemate and work cooperatively on immigration.
"To all the DREAMers who are watching today, don't give up," Durbin said on the Senate floor Monday. "I know that your lives are hanging in the balance on what we do here."
Lee's life is no longer hanging in the balance, but she was one of those watching via the television news on Monday — and organizing in the streets. She came away feeling conflicted. 
"People put their trust in the Democratic Party and they're not delivering," she said. At the same time, she believes Durbin will "keep his word and fight for the Dream Act all the way until it's passed,"
Others said if anyone can get a deal, it's Durbin. 
"He's more passionate about this than anybody," said Sen. Jeff Flake, R-Ariz., one of the key GOP players in the negotiations. And "he's more experienced on it than anybody." 
.Read more:
