Don't imprison first offenders: Your Say
Let's stop using the adage "lock em up" when someone commits a non-violent crime.

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Letter to the editor: 
America's criminal justice system is a disgrace; and it's failing on multiple levels. One aspect that stands out is incarceration. The U.S. houses more than 2.2 million souls in prisons, more than runner up China, a country that has four times our population. Containing just 4.4% of the planet's population, we house 22% of the global prison population. Cross the border to Canada and the imprisonment rate drops from 716 per 100,000 to 114 per 100,000. That's not so grand. America is No. 1, but not in what we should brag about.

Let's stop using the utterly futile and costly adage "lock em up" when someone commits a non-violent crime. End incarceration for non-violent offenders, with no criminal history who are not likely to become repeat offenders. Whether they steal a hot dog from an unguarded vendor or millions like Bernard Madoff, allow judges the discretion to suspend any prison sentence for such candidates. Use home confinement (except for going to or from work), restitution and the threat of imposing the suspended sentence upon failure to comply.
Use the freed up prison cells to house the truly dangerous, the repetitive and the incorrigible to protect both themselves and society from further crimes and mayhem. Let's replace the "ignorance pills" we feed our juries, jurists and legislators with wisdom, compassion and common sense.
Walt Zlotow; Glen Ellyn, Ill.
Facebook comments are edited for clarity and grammar:
It seems like GPS anklets and house arrest, or restricted movements to work and the doctor, for example, would work for millions now in prison for relatively minor offenses. Let them continue to work, pay taxes, support their family and contribute to society, while serving their terms in restricted freedom. I'm not talking about violent crimes here, just stuff like embezzlement, minor drug busts and tax evasion.
— Dwane Koppler
There are some prisoners who actually would like to have their lives back. There are others who are vicious humans who should be kept under lock and key.
Keeping DNA on file from those who are released, and promising longer terms for repeat offenders, may in fact keep them on the straight path. Having made a stupid choice should not lock many of these individuals up with hardened criminals, sealing their fates in a confined world of violence. Locking people up for any number of minor crimes just to feed prisons destroys entire lives of people who really only need a second chance. It is up to them to do the right thing or end up back inside a cell for eternity.
— Steve Poirier
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2dZmS1U
