Tuesday storm: Airlines cancel 1,600 flights; more than 3,100 delayed
Today in the Sky 
 3 Shares 




LATEST UPDATE: Air travelers faced another day of disruptions Wednesday as winter weather snarled flights at dozens of U.S. airports.
See Wednesday's update for the latest information.
ORIGINAL POST: 
Last update: 6:10 p.m. ET on Tuesday, Jan. 17, 2018. 
Airlines were canceling flights and waiving change fees as wintry weather threatened airports across a large swath of the United States on Tuesday. Texas and the Northeast were the regions in the cross hairs of the latest winter storm to affect travel. 
Nearly 1,600 flights had been canceled and another 3,100 delayed as of 6 p.m. ET, according to flight tracking service FlightAware. Wednesday looked like it would be messy for fliers, too, with more than 340 flights had already grounded. 
The biggest disruption on Tuesday came at Houston Bush Intercontinental Airport, the busiest hub for United Airlines. Nearly 800 flights had been grounded as 5 p.m. local time, accounting for about a third of the airport's entire daily schedule. 
Ominously for fliers, cancellations were also on the rise in in Atlanta, home to the world's busiest airport. Wintry weather was expected to begin falling there Tuesday evening. 
Delta, which operates its busiest hub there, had canceled about 275 flights on Tuesday -- mostly in the evening ahead of the poor weather. Fortunately for fliers, the weather there was expected to improve Wednesday. 
IN PICTURES: 43 cool aviation photos (story continues below)

 Hawaiian Airlines Boeing 717 jets park at the inter-island terminal at Honolulu International Airport on Nov. 8, 2017. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special to USA TODAY
For Tuesday, Houston remained the epicenter for delays and cancellations. 
Aside from the busier Bush Intercontinental, Houston Hobby also was hard hit. About 225 cancellations were reported there as of 5 p.m. local time, representing about half of Tuesday's schedule. 
The problems in Houston came as the city was dealing with ice and freezing rain. 
More broadly, travelers should brace for delays and disruptions across the South as wintry weather pushed deep into the region. Also seeing higher-than-average rates of delays and cancellations early Tuesday were the Austin, Dallas Love, Dallas/Fort Worth San Antonio and New Orleans airports.
Most big airlines were waiving rebooking fees for several airports in Texas.
That also was true in the Northeast, where light to moderate snow was forecast to fall across much of the region. Several of the nation’s busiest airports – including those serving New York, Washington, Baltimore, Boston and Philadelphia – were forecast to get accumulating snow late Tuesday into Wednesday.

That ranged from just an inch or two in Washington to more than a half-foot in New England. Flights could be disrupted both from snow and ice removal and from backups from de-icing aircraft prior to departure.
Already, nearly 60 flights were canceled in Boston Tuesday, with conditions expected to worsen on Wednesday. 
Some cities in the South were expected to get wintry weather Tuesday into Wednesday, including places like Charlotte, Nashville, Louisville and Richmond, Va.
By Tuesday, both American and Delta had expanded their winter-weather waivers to include a number of airports in the Southeast. 
Scroll down for links to airline rebooking waivers for the latest storm:
