'African diaspora tourism' spans the globe
African-origin people, their descendants, their history and their culture are written into the DNA of communities around the globe.
That fact has given rise to what some people call "African diaspora tourism," featuring trips ranging from a half-day to several days.
Paris, the adopted home of such notables as singer-dancer Josephine Baker and writer Richard Wright, abounds in black-heritage tours. Even one cherry blossom tour in Tokyo has some Afrocentric elements.
Many itineraries take on squarely the history that mainstream destination tours tend to skirt.
"We acknowledge the slavery experience but find inspiration in asking, 'How we have survived, what have we preserved, how have we evolved?'" says Richard Honeywell, founder of the Brooklyn-based firm African Journeys.
A sampling of what's out there:
Netherlands
Black Heritage Amsterdam Tours (Black
 HeritageTours.com), founded by Jennifer Tosch, offers boat-based excursions that stop at canal house museums, take in African-themed art, discuss the wealthy Dutch merchants who owned slaves in the colonies, and end with a short walk to the National Slavery Monument at Oosterpark.
United Kingdom
In London, Black History Walks (BlackHistory
 Walks.co.uk) offers several tours, including one that stops at St. Paul's Cathedral and some banking centers, to illustrate African influences on architecture and construction of prominent buildings. Black-history movies, rare documentaries and talks are hosted once a month in the London area. Walking tours also are available for Trafalgar Square, Notting Hill, Elephant & Castle and Docklands
France
Paris boasts at least three Afrocentric tour companies, including:
Ricki Stevenson's Black Paris Tours (Black
 ParisTour.com). This company offers bus and walking trips that take travelers to the concert hall where celebrated African-American singers and jazz musicians performed; a monument recognizing France's abolition of the African slave trade; and a church dedicated to the African St. Augustine.

Julia Browne's Walking the Spirit (WalkingTheSpirit.com). Bus and walking tours include "Writers, Artists & Intellectuals," featuring visits to Paris's lively Latin Quarter and chic Saint-Germain-des-Prés. Guests see the cafe where Richard Wright wrote and the urban landscapes that inspired Boston-born painter Lois Mailou Jones. Beyond Paris, custom excursions are available to the north coast city of Nantes, where slave ships were built; the jazz magnets of Nice, the French Riviera and Monaco; and Château des Milandes, a small castle that was once Josephine Baker's home.
Tom Reeves's and Monique Wells's Discover Paris! (Discover
Paris.net). This firm offers a banquet of gourmet food and wine tours but also leads several niche tours of black heritage destinations, including one along the Champs Elysées where American author James Baldwin led a crowd in support of the 1963 March on Washington.
Panama
Richard Honeywell's African Journeys (facebook.com/AfricanJourney) offers occasional group tours to regions that are home to descendants of Africans brought in by Spain in the mid-1500s, as well as of a second migration of blacks who came from the Caribbean to help build the canal.
Brazil
Salvador is the capital of Bahia and the heart of Afro-Brazilian culture, as well as a UNESCO World Heritage site. The city was the birthplace of well-known Afro-Brazilian musicians such as Gilberto Gil. Brazilian Cultural Tours by Joel Gondim (SankofaTours.net) offers tours to a district renowned for its colonial architecture. Sites include the last slave market in Brazil, the first African church in the new world, which was built in 1704, art galleries, and shops.
Japan
John Kelly's Black Tokyo Tours (BlackTokyoTours.com) is a seasonal business offering four tours per year. "Our company doesn't advertise itself as a heritage tour, " Kelly writes, "because African heritage is limited in Japan. However, on the Sakura (cherry blossom) tour, we do visit two sites — a monastery and a castle — where the African influence is present and appreciated by the Japanese."
Travel portals & blogs
A sampling of travel resources available online:
I'm Black & I Travel! (ImBlackNITravel.com) website features a blog by former newspaper journalist Greg Gross. He also operates a travel agency and consultancy, Trips by Greg.
NomadnessTravel Tribe, (www.nomadnesstv.com) is Evita Robinson's by-invitation-only, online social community for urban dwellers of all ethnicities from around the world. Not only must you apply, you need at least one stamp on your passport to hang out with this tribe.
Soul of America (SoulofAmerica.com) specializes in tour information about domestic and international destinations, cruises, travel advice and directory listings for African-American-owned travel businesses. Founder Thomas Dorsey says this 18-year-old venture is the first online travel guide of its kind.
Travel Noire (TravelNoire.com) is Zim Ugochukwu's digital travel publishing platform with more than 100 contributors, and which caters to folks just getting started in international tourism.
Ugogurl.com is the website of Elaine Lee, attorney by occupation, travel writer on the side and editor of the anthology: "Go Girl: The Black Woman's Book of Travel and Adventure." It showcases African-American travel writing and offers travel-planning tips and tools.
WanderlustAndLipstick.com is Beth Whitman's female-focused travel site featuring reviews, information, inspiration.
Ruane also reports for The News-Press in Fort Myers, Fla.
CONNECTTWEET 5 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/1Bxb9Oj
