USA TODAY Partners with RESOLVE to Heighten Infertility Awareness
CONNECTTWEET 41 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
This week is National Infertility Awareness Week, and USA TODAY has partnered with RESOLVE: The National Infertility Association to bring awareness and education to the public around the topic of infertility.
 USA TODAY has been working on The Psychology of Infertility for over a year, following three couples on their quest for parenthood. They attended appointments with one couple who drives from Ohio to Central New York to get IVF treatments-- the six-hour trek across state lines saves couple thousands on treatment. Another couple has just learned that their paperwork was accepted and they're in the process of adopting a second boy, due this summer. And a same-sex couple flies across the country to befriend the surrogate carrying their baby. USA TODAY was in the hospital room for the birth of the healthy baby boy.
 “Infertility is often under-covered and under-discussed, said Holly Moore, Manager of Network Engagement for USA TODAY NETWORK. “So many people suffer in silence, and we wanted to show them that they are not alone. With this project, our goal is to help families that are dealing with infertility to feel less alone and maybe even empower some to share their experiences. We want those who don't struggle to empathize and be aware of what their friends, cousins, neighbors and co-workers could be dealing with.”
 The struggle is very common-- an estimated 1 in 8 couples deal with it. But despite how common it is, people often feel isolated and alone. Women who experience infertility have the same levels of anxiety and depression as those with cancer, HIV or heart disease, research shows.
 “The world of infertility is complex, and weaving together personal stories that are relevant with facts and data that get it right – is TOUGH,” said Barbara Collura, President/CEO of RESOLVE: The National Infertility Association. “USA TODAY nailed it! I teared up watching the video, and was immensely impressed with the content. A great deal of effort went into this because most often people get something wrong. We are so proud to be a part of the story. It’s a perfect alignment of our mission and meets an important need for our community.”
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2phnaX4
