Tour chef Richard Sandoval's restaurants and food
Aqimero, located in the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Philadelphia, is Richard Sandoval’s newest restaurant. The kitchen, which is built around a wood fire oven, pairs Sandoval’s signature Latino cuisine with Asian-inspired dishes and a raw bar and sushi menu. Don Riddle Photography
 The familiar combination of roasted beets and goat cheese at Tamayo gets some Latin flare with the addition of a piloncillo chile ancho reduction, watercress, oranges and caramelized pecans –– with the cheese used as the base for the dressing. Richard Sandoval Restaurants
 La Biblioteca de Tequila, or The Library of Tequila, aims to offer a full catalog of agave-based spirits. Its locations in New York and Denver stock between 350 and 400 tequilas and mezcals from major producers and craft distillers. Adam Larkey Photography
 Guests at the Four Seasons have the opportunity to choose their own ceviche by participating in the thrice weekly “catch of the day program,” in which they can select fresh-caught seafood from a fishing boat and request their own preparation. Paul Wagtouicz
 The colorful La Bomba at Toro Toro is a dessert meant for two, combining cream cheese mousse, passionfruit sorbet, chocolate cookie crumbs, strawberries and cream and dulce de leche ice creams, mixed berries, caramel and vanilla bean cream Anglaise. Richard Sandoval Restaurants
Last SlideNext Slide

You may not know Richard Sandoval’s name, but you should: The Denver-based chef owns some 45 restaurants in the USA, Mexico, Asia and the Middle East.
Despite this outsized footprint, Sandoval doesn’t want his restaurants, which are rooted in his expansive concept of Latin American cuisine, to be all about him.
As the hands-on owner of “100%” of his business, he logs some 300,000 miles a year, traveling every Monday through Thursday from his home base to oversee his empire.
His road schedule is partly why — except for Top Chef Masters and the occasional morning show — Sandoval doesn’t have quite the same media presence as other top chefs.
“I’ve done everything pretty much under the radar,” he says. “My personality is more introvert than extrovert.”
The Culinary Institute of American-trained chef would rather let his plates do the talking.
Aqimero, his new spot at the Ritz-Carlton in Philadelphia, is typical of his approach to cooking and the design-forward environments he likes to create in hotels and resorts. In an iconic setting in a former bank modeled after the Pantheon in Rome, Sandoval has fashioned a sustainable seafood concept that touches on “a rollercoaster of flavors” –– including a raw bar and sushi -– and deploys a wood-burning grill as the “focal point.”
“To me, it’s a very well-rounded menu that has options for everybody, from a younger person who wants to be more adventurous to someone who wants to play it safe,” he says.
Although Sandoval has focused some of his restaurants around one cuisine — such as the “modern Mexican” at his flagship Maya in New York City — increasingly he’s taking a more expansive view, like that of Aqimero, which translates to "right here, right now.”
“Today, more than ever, I want to create an interactive dining experience,” he says. “Before, people had an appetizer, entrée and dessert, and dinner was over. I like to take people on a journey that’s more ambitious. I recommend two to three plates per person and sharing an entrée.
“Now the experience becomes an interactive tasting. You’re passing the plates around, talking about the ingredients and the tastes.”
Sandoval’s personal journey started in the restaurant business (his father owned several spots in Acapulco, Mexico) before taking a detour to the professional tennis tour. Eventually, he realized he wasn’t going to become a top player, and decided to attend the Culinary Institute of America. Describing himself now as a someone who “hacks” at the tennis ball, Sandoval sees links between cooking professionally and competing on the court.
“The adrenalin is similar when the tickets come up and the restaurant starts to fill up,” he says. “I call it the cooking zone — you forget about everything when you’re cooking and plating. It’s amazing how similar they are.”
After he opened Maya in New York in 1997 and received two stars from the New York Times, the offers started pouring in, but Sandoval doesn’t expand just to add another location to hang up his chef’s toque.
“It’s been grow as you go, with a lot of passion and hard work,” he says.
With several new restaurants in the works, including spots at the Conrad in Chicago and the Four Seasons in Houston, Sandoval isn’t slowing down, despite entertaining an offer last year to sell a portion of the company.
“It’s never been about a number; it’s never been about the money,” he says. “I love what I do and will continue to do it as long as I continue to create different, relevant restaurants that people enjoy.”
Browse the gallery above to see where you can try Sandoval’s restaurants and signature dishes.
Plus, see previous chef empires below.
