T-Mobile goes after Verizon with free Galaxy deal
CLOSE

 T-Mobile has come out with its response to Verizon's new data plans : a free Galaxy phone. WIBBITZ

Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this story gave the wrong title for Mike Sievert, T-Mobile's chief operating officer. ​
T-Mobile has come out with its response to Verizon's new data plans: a free Galaxy phone.
The nation's third-largest carrier announced on Tuesday a new deal that will throw in a free Galaxy phone for anyone on its 6GB, 10GB or Unlimited Simple Choice plans. The Galaxy won't be one of the popular models like the S7 or S7 Edge, instead either a Galaxy On5 or slightly more powerful Galaxy J7. 
 Users on the company's 6GB Simple Choice plan can get a free Galaxy On5, while those on the company's higher 10GB or unlimited plans can choose between the On5 or the Galaxy J7. Those on T-Mobile's 2GB Simple Choice plan are not eligible for a free device.
Both phones are relatively cheap, with the On5 available for $139.99 and the J7 available for $239.99, both without a contract. They are also nowhere near as powerful as their Galaxy S or Note cousins.
That said, both feature large HD displays, Android 6.0 Marshmallow and decent processors that will make them a solid backup or starter smartphone choice, particularly given T-Mobile's offer.
The promotion is the latest salvo in a battle amongst wireless carriers to win over wireless customers. In addition to Verizon's updated plans, the past few weeks have seen AT&T come out with weekly promotions for discounted movie tickets on Tuesdays while Sprint has brought in Verizon's "Can you hear me now?" actor to promote its network in new ads.
T-Mobile has been particularly busy, offering their own Tuesday giveaways of tickets, Dominos pizzas, Lyft rides and Vudu movies as well as free high data for those travelling to Europe this summer.

T-Mobile's latest promotion is open to both new and existing subscribers who have to walk into their local T-Mobile store, call T-Mobile's customer service hotline or go online to get a device. As with similar device promotions the user will need to maintain their T-Mobile service for 24 months to get the monthly bill credit ($5.84 per month in the case of the On5, $10 per month for the J7) and if they cancel before the 24 months pass they will need to pay the remainder of what's owed on the devices.
While the devices are free you would still have to pay the taxes when purchasing them.
Positioned as a back-to-school offer, the deal starts July 13 and will run for a "limited time" though T-Mobile would not confirm when the promo would end.
“(The third quarter) is huge for our industry and for families travelling and getting ready for back to school," said T-Mobile's chief operating officer Mike Sievert in an email to USA TODAY.
"After Verizon’s massive price hike, we knew it was the perfect time to step in and give families some relief like only the Un-carrier can or would with free Galaxy smartphones for everyone.”
Other deals are coming
T-Mobile's announcement comes at interesting time as shoppers flock to the internet today in hopes of finding Black Friday-like deals on electronics, including cell phones, from Amazon's Prime Day.
The promotion also comes only a few weeks before the typical fall phone refresh season where many manufacturers, including Apple and Samsung, are expected to be coming out with new devices. Those new phones will be much more powerful than the two Galaxies T-Mobile is offering in this deal and their arrival will likely lead to a drop in prices for older models such as the iPhone 6 and last year's iPhone 6S, Galaxy S6 and Note 5.
For those on T-Mobile and in need of a quick new phone this promotion is a good deal, but it's important to keep in mind what's on the horizon before taking on the 24-month commitment.
Follow Eli Blumenthal on Twitter @eliblumenthal
CONNECTTWEET 6 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/29yvl5A
