Some Eagles fans apologize for bad Philly behavior by donating to Vikings charity
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: Dominance. Heartbreak. Hope. Trysta Krick details the key moments in the Eagles run to Super Bowl LII. USA TODAY Sports

Philadelphia Eagles fans have donated more than $10,000 to Minnesota Vikings coach Mike Zimmer's foundation as a means of apologizing for their brethren's behavior at last weekend's NFC Championship Game.
Videos posted to social media Sunday depicted a hostile environment for Vikings fans attending the game, which Philadelphia won, 38-7. Some Minnesota fans were booed, taunted and the subject of expletives at close range as they walked through the parking lot. Another video showed what appeared to be full cans of beer being thrown at Vikings fans heading to the stadium.
Other Eagles fans, meanwhile, aimed to make up for that hostility through charity, continuing a trend that has swept through the NFL in recent months. The Mike Zimmer Foundation posted on Twitter on Wednesday afternoon that it had received nearly $11,000 in donations from Eagles fans with "heartfelt apologies" for how Vikings fans were treated.
“We may not have gotten the warmest welcome in (Philadelphia) or the outcome that we wanted," Corri Zimmer White, the executive director of her father's foundation, told the team's website. "But it’s cool to see when football fans from different teams come together to do some good."
While we may have our differences, we give credit where it's due...@eagles fans have donated nearly 11k to MZF with heartfelt apologies for how SOME of their fans treated @vikings in Philly. This is amazing! We promise we will change some lives with this money! Thank you!
— MZFOUNDATION (@ZimFoundation) January 24, 2018
The Mike Zimmer Foundation was created to honor the life of his late wife, Vikki, who died unexpectedly of natural causes in 2009. It works primarily with children by distributing scholarships, hosting football camps and working with children's hospitals, according to the foundation's website.
Eagles fans are the latest group to convey their feelings through charitable donations. Earlier this season, Buffalo Bills fans donated more than $200,000 to Cincinnati Bengals quarterback Andy Dalton's foundation after the Bengals helped Buffalo squeak into the playoffs. Bengals fans later donated to Jacksonville Jaguars quarterback Blake Bortles' foundation as a thank you for beating their AFC North rival, the Pittsburgh Steelers.
Minnesota fans are also no strangers to the trend. Over the past few weeks, they've donated more than $220,000 to a foundation created by New Orleans Saints punter Thomas Morstead, who played through an injury in the divisional round and was among the first players to return to the field for a meaningless extra-point attempt at the end of the game between the two teams.
Contact Tom Schad at tschad@usatoday.com or on Twitter @Tom_Schad.
PHOTOS: Best of AFC, NFC championship games
