Spring 2016: New baby animals to find at zoos across the USA
The San Diego Safari Park is one of nine breeding facilities as part of the cheetah Breeding Center Coalition. The coalition’s goal is to create a sustainable cheetah population that will prevent extinction of the world’s fastest land animal. Ken Bohn, San Diego Zoo Park
 “Cotton-top tamarins are very social animals and our guests will have the unique opportunity to observe the family dynamics as the baby grows up,” said Jeannine Jackle, who is the Assistant Curator of the Tropical Forest. Zoo New England, Roisin Morgan
 Kori bustards are the largest flighted bird species and are native to southern Africa but are also classified as near threatened. The chick is currently being cared for by zoo staff until he or she is old enough to meet first-time parents Tuza and Snake. Zoo Atlanta
 Finally, Zoo Atlanta welcomed four Guatemalan beaded lizards, which are one of the world's most rare lizard species with only 350 or so believed to remain in the wild where they are exclusive to Guatemala's Motagua Valley. Adam K Thompson, Zoo Atlanta
Last SlideNext Slide

With spring turning into summer, this is the perfect time to find plenty of cute baby animals at zoos across the USA. From little cheetahs in San Diego to snow leopard cub triplets in Akron, Ohio to a cotton-top tamarin in Boston, here are the cutest baby animals to check out at zoos across the country right now:
The San Diego Zoo Safari Park welcomed cheetah mom Addison and her six cubs this spring. The little cheetahs were born on Nov. 21, 2015 at the park's cheetah breeding center, but just made their public debut at the park. They are Addison's second litter, and also set a record as the largest number of cubs raised by a cheetah at the Safari Park. There are four female cubs, named Darlene, Geisel, L.C., and Mary Jane, and two male cubs, Donald and Copley. The San Diego Safari Park is one of nine breeding facilities as part of the cheetah Breeding Center Coalition. The coalition’s goal is to create a sustainable cheetah population that will prevent extinction of the world’s fastest land animal.
Baby orangutan – Indianapolis Zoo
The Indianapolis Zoo welcomed a baby orangutan when 23-year-old mom Sirih, a Sumatran orangutan, gave birth to the newborn female, Mila, on March 23. The event was cause to celebrate because it was the first birth for the $26 million Simon Skodt International Orangutan Center at the Indy Zoo. Orangutans are highly endangered thanks to destruction of forests in their native homeland in Sumatra and Borneo.
Nigerian dwarf goat & cotton-top tamarin – Franklin Park Zoo
The Franklin Park Zoo has two new babies to see this spring. First up is Chewbacca, a Nigerian dwarf goat, who was born to mom Leia and dad Lucky on February 16. She is the goat couple's second kid. The zoo also welcomed a baby cotton-top tamarin to parents Wilma and Federico. The sex of the newest family member is not yet known, but the little tamarin joins its parents and siblings Pebbles and Betty in the Tropical Forest exhibit at the zoo. “Cotton-top tamarins are very social animals and our guests will have the unique opportunity to observe the family dynamics as the baby grows up,” said Jeannine Jackle, who is the Assistant Curator of the Tropical Forest.
Snow leopard cubs – Akron Zoo
In Akron, Ohio, the Akron Zoo was proud to announce that snow leopard mom Shanti gave birth to her first set of triplets. This was a first for the zoo. Although 7-year-old Shanti has had other litters before, she has never given birth to three cubs at once. The little snow leopards were born on March 5, only weighed about a pound each, and did not open their eyes until they were two weeks old. The family is currently off-exhibit in a private cubbing area with their mom, but will be on display to the public as the get older, most likely by the end of the month. The zoo also plans to announce a naming contest for the cubs in the near future. Snow leopards are an endangered species, with only around 4,000 left in the wild, primarily due to loss of habitat, illegal poaching for their pelts and body parts and killings by local herders when a snow leopard has preyed on their livestock.
In Los Angeles, 8-year-old mom Halali and 18-year-old dad Billy welcomed an antelope baby Rayne on January 6. The first baby animal born at the zoo in 2016, Rayne is a black duiker. In the wild, black duikers are found in parts of West Africa between Guinea and the coast of Nigeria. Rayne is currently being cared for at the zoo's nursery along with Noah, who is a red flanked duiker born just before Christmas. Red flanked duikers are some of the smallest antelope species and are found in western and central Africa.
There's a new bonobo baby named Max at the Columbus Zoo. The bonobo is in the great ape family and is similar to a chimpanzee. Max was the fourth baby for mother Lady, who is caring for the newborn in the company of the other bonobos in her group. Because bonobos live in dynamic groups, Max's father has yet to be identified, but will be once the results of the genetic paternity testing come back. Max is the 15th bonobo born at the Columbus Zoo since it received its first bonobos in 1990 in conjunction with the Species Survival Plan for this endangered ape. There are only seven facilities in North America caring for bonobos and of those facilities the Columbus Zoo has the second largest group with 17.
Lowland Gorilla – Fort Worth Zoo
First time western lowland gorilla parents Gracie and Elmo welcomed their first baby on December 5, 2015. The baby male gorilla, Augustus (or Gus for short), was also the first birth of a western lowland gorilla for the Fort Worth Zoo. Zoo officials say the young gorilla will stay close to his mother while getting acclimated at the World of Primates exhibit. He can be seen in indoor and outdoor exhibits at various times during the day, depending on the weather and his activity level. The International Union for Conservation of Nature considers western lowland gorillas to be critically endangered due to poaching, habitat loss and disease in its native Republic of Congo. The Fort Worth Zoo is the only zoo in the nation to house representatives of all four great ape species: gorillas, orangutans, chimpanzees and bonobos.
Prehensile-tailed porcupine – Binghamton Zoo
In Binghamton, N.Y., second-time porcupine parents Mattie and Zoey welcomed their latest addition, a 410-gram prehensile-tailed porcupine on St Patrick's Day. The baby's sex has not yet been determined, so it does not have a name, but it has already joined its parents and sister Norwan on exhibit in the New World Tropics building. Prehensile-tailed porcupines are found in South America. They are not born with sharp or barbed quills. Instead, the quills are soft and bendable, gradually hardening in the first few days after birth until they reach maturity after 10 weeks.
Masai giraffe – Brevard Zoo
Standing tall at 6’4” just a little over a month after he was born, Brevard Zoo’s newest addition is also the tallest Masai giraffe ever born at the facility. After a gestation period lasting more than a year, 14-year-old Milenna gave birth to the male calf early on March 7. The little one is the second giraffe born at the Florida zoo in under four months. A female, who has yet to be named, was born to another giraffe, Johari, on November 29, 2015. Seventeen-year-old Rafiki is the father of both calves. The calf is not expected to make its public debut for several weeks while he bonds with his mother behind the scenes, but photos and videos of the baby can be found via the zoo's social media channels.
Multiple species – Zoo Atlanta
Zoo Atlanta has said hello to a number of new babies from various species this year. The first animal born at the zoo in 2016 was a milky eagle owlet named Rwenzori. The milky eagle owl is Africa’s largest owl species, and Rwenzori may stand up to two feet tall when fully grown. In April, Zoo Atlanta welcomed its first kori bustard chick ever hatched here. Kori bustards are the largest flighted bird species and are native to southern Africa but are also classified as near threatened. The chick is currently being cared for by zoo staff until he or she is old enough to meet first-time parents Tuza and Snake. Finally, Zoo Atlanta welcomed four Guatemalan beaded lizards, which are one of the world's most rare lizard species with only 350 or so believed to remain in the wild where they are exclusive to Guatemala's Motagua Valley.
CONNECTTWEET 2 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1TctupJ
