Need a last-minute holiday gift? How about a free Iowa farmhouse
Kyle Munson
 USA Today network
 10:51 a.m. Friday, Dec. 15, 2017 
DES MOINES — Still in search of the perfect holiday surprise for the lover of all things farm life in your family? 
This last-minute gift idea might be the ultimate Iowa stocking stuffer. Sure, it’s a tad grandiose. But it also qualifies as a relative bargain: A free farmhouse. On Craigslist. 
No, this four-bedroom specimen of rural majesty may not fit under the average Christmas tree, let alone in a stocking. And you shouldn't expect Santa and his reindeer to tow it to your vacant lot. 
But it’s yours if you’re willing somehow to remove it from Roger and Linda Dolecheck’s farmstead in rural Ellston.

Farmer Roger Dolecheck in southern Iowa is so desperate to find a new owner for his old farmhouse, rather than tear it down, that he has offered it for free on Craigslist. 
The Dolechecks, who farm thousands of acres in and around Ringgold County and feed hundreds of head of cattle, have been trying for years to find a new family to adopt a house. So Roger Dolecheck posted yet another plea on Craigslist that in the past week alone has generated about 25 curious phone calls. 
“This house is free if you move it,” he wrote. “Beautiful house with new windows and repairs. Will be torn down this winter. Would like to save it.”
To translate for the rest of you who don't know stoic Iowa farmers as well as I do, Roger Dolecheck typing a low-key "Would like to save it" on Craigslist carries all the emotional weight of Marlon Brando screaming "Stella!" in “A Streetcar Named Desire.” 
Roger Dolecheck grew up just a few miles down the road. He and his wife purchased the house in 1984 and raised a family there. About seven years ago they built a new house on the same property. 
The couple today can glance out their kitchen window and still see the top of their former home about 100 yards away as it pokes above the roof line of a machine shed. 
“We just want it moved,” Roger Dolecheck said. “We raised four children in it, and it was kind of fun. We had a blast in it.”
The Dolechecks are sentimental about the old farmhouse — assessed at $52,700 — for a couple more reasons. 
First, the farmhouse has historical value as a home to landmark Iowa agricultural innovation.
The Baker family, Roger Dolecheck said, hammered the house together in the early 1900s. Raymond F. Baker, who grew up on the farm, was an agronomy student at Iowa State University in the 1920s when he met Henry A. Wallace, the editor of “Wallace’s Farmer” and eventual secretary of agriculture and vice president under Franklin Delano Roosevelt. 
Wallace gave the ISU student some of his new experimental corn samples.
The fledgling crop scientist's father thought hybrid corn was “a lot of foolishness,” Raymond Dolecheck told the Register in 1976, “but Mom knew how important it was to me, so she took Dad out into the field, and they planted it as I had instructed.” 
Wallace and Baker won awards for their hybrid corn's fantastic high yields. Baker in 1928 was hired as the second employee at Wallace's 2-year-old company, what became Pioneer Hi-Bred and today is DuPont Pioneer. Baker died at age 92 in 1999, and that same year his estate donated $80 million to ISU. 
Beyond the house being considered a monument to agricultural royalty, and both the literal and symbolic seeds of an international agribiz empire, there's a more personal reason Roger Dolecheck finds it hard to contemplate letting the wrecking ball swing. 
He invested thousands of hours of sweat equity and craftsmanship in the house, not to mention about $150,000 in repairs and upgrades. 
He stripped, sanded and stained the woodwork, revealing the beautiful grain beneath the cream and pink paint that was all the rage in the 1970s. Remodeled the kitchen. Installed new drywall. Converted the attic into a massive family room. 
For about a dozen years, from 1984 to 1996, his routine was to tend to his fields throughout the warm months and then toil indoors in winter. 
Shortly after moving out, Roger Dolecheck thought he had found a solution: The house was scheduled to be moved to Ramsey Farm, a historical farmstead and event center east of Mount Ayr. But the temporary removal of a single key power line that stretched across the road near a substation would have cost nearly $20,000, essentially doubling the price of the 20-mile move. So it was scrapped. 
“I would still love to have somebody move it and live in it,” Dolecheck said. “I’ve even offered here lately to move it to some of my land or help find some land." 
Related
