5 things you need to know Tuesday
VP candidates Pence, Kaine take debate spotlight
Tuesday’s debate between the two vice presidential nominees — Tim Kaine, a Democratic senator from Virginia, and Mike Pence, the Republican governor of Indiana — won’t likely draw the record-breaking 84 million people who watched Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump duke it out last week, but it could give voters a clearer sense of the differences between the two parties. The fight over female voters will carry into the debate, as Pence has another opportunity to overcome voter skepticism of Trump.CBS News correspondent and digital anchor Elaine Quijano is charged with moderating the debate in the small town of Farmville, Va. (9-10:30 p.m. ET).
CLOSE

 USA TODAY Washington Bureau Chief Susan Page takes a look at the things to watch for during the Vice Presidential Debate between Tim Kaine and Mike Pence. USA TODAY
Haiti, East Coast on alert as Hurricane Matthew rages through the Caribbean
Matthew, the strongest hurricane to hit the Atlantic basin in almost a decade, is expected to remain powerful and dangerous Tuesday, possibly bringing life-threatening rain and winds to portions of Haiti. The Category 4 storm, which could dump up to 25 inches of rain over much of southern Haiti,could hit anywhere from Florida to Maine — though officials say it's too soon to determine Matthew's  impact on the East Coast. Despite the uncertain forecasts, Florida and North Carolina declared states of emergency in preparation for the storm, which has caused three deaths and forced massive evacuations from Haiti to Cuba.
CLOSE

 WUSA's chief meteorologist continues to track Hurricane Matthew as it heads towards Cuba. 
Google's buzzed-about event hits San Francisco 
Google has built a lot of hype around it’s Tuesday event in San Francisco, where it’s expected to reveal new smartphones, and possibly, virtual reality headsets and other smart-home devices. To tease the event, Google has set up a website, and put up large billboards in New York and other cities in the U.S. featuring the silhouette of a phone centered around the hashtag, #madebyGoogle. Rumors and leaks point to new smartphones from manufacturer HTC, called Pixel and Pixel XL, which are said to come with large displays, fast processors, improved cameras and sleek designs — and both are expected to have headphone jacks.

Corrections & clarifications: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated the date that the Supreme Court will hear arguments in the Samsung-Apple case. The correct date is Oct. 11.
Samsung, Apple head to the Supreme Court
The years-long Samsung-Apple patent dispute heads to the nation’s highest court Oct. 11 as the U.S. Supreme Court will hear arguments on financial damages the South Korean smartphone behemoth owes Apple for allegedly violating design patents. The court could decide damages and, more important, define the value of design work, which is increasingly important in the tech industry as products like smartphones become commodities. A jury in 2012 decided Samsung infringed on three of Apple’s iPhone design patents — based on their look, not function — and Apple was awarded nearly $1 billion. The award was reduced on appeal to $584 million. The Supreme Court typically issues decisions several months after hearing arguments.

The public bids farewell to "The King"
Sports fans will be able to say their final goodbyes to Arnold Palmer at a public ceremony Tuesday in his hometown of Latrobe, Pa. Palmer, who was one of golf's greatest players and ambassadors, died at age 87 after complications from heart problems last month. The legend received virtually every national award in golf and was largely responsible for popularizing the sport to new fans thanks to the TV boom in the late 1950s.

 Palmer and his wife, Winnie, make a happy couple after he won the 1958 Masters. Horace Cort, AP
And the essentials:
Weather: Severe thunderstorms are in line for the Plains while rain and snow will spread across the northern Rockies.
Stocks: Japan shares lead Asia market gains; British pound sinks against the dollar.
TV Tonight: Wondering what to watch tonight? TV critic Robert Bianco looks at The Flash, The Mindy Project and the VP Debate.
Be inspired: Orangutan kisses pregnant woman's belly through glass.
If you missed Monday's news, we’ve got you covered.
You can subscribe to get the day's top news each weekday in your inbox.
CONNECTTWEET 5 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2dEGzI7
