Campus killers' hints ignored - USATODAY.com
About once every year, a campus murder is committed after administrators take insufficent action despite warnings about threats, flawed security or dangerous situations, a USA TODAY analysis of college homicides since 1991 shows.
In at least 15 of the cases reviewed, the campus killer showed signs of being a danger, often with either a criminal or psychotic background, or by making violent threats.
The massacre of 32 at Virginia Tech in April, like those other 15 cases, fits a pattern of killings committed by isolated, vengeful students who turn homicidal with shocking brutality. Students have been stabbed 97 times, shot 11 times, burned, strangled, suffocated and beaten with force that a pathologist compared to falling off a TV tower.
The campus murders examined also have exposed safety flaws such as inadequate security forces and the ease with which students and workers can hide criminal backgrounds, the analysis shows. Just this week, relatives of those killed at Virginia Tech demanded the release of student gunman Seung Hui Cho's mental health records.
About a third of campus killers analyzed over the 15-year period had recently been rejected, many of them men who had killed a former girlfriend and often themselves. Seven were failing or thwarted graduate students who murdered faculty members.
"There's a lot at stake personally in college" and rejection can be daunting, says Russ Federman, head of the University of Virginia's psychological services.
Homicides on campus still remain a rarity. The nation's 4,200 campuses — home to about 17.5 million students — report a total of about 15 murders a year, according to Education Department data.
USA TODAY reviewed information on 110 campus murders since 1991 for which detailed information was available from court testimony, depositions, psychological records and news reports.
College administrators say they usually cannot prevent murders because they don't know if a student will turn violent. "It's rare that a college would have some kind of advanced notice," says Brett Sokolow, a Pennsylvania lawyer who advises colleges on safety.
That may be the case because campuses often lack systems to spot violent students, says S. Daniel Carter, vice president of Security on Campus, a safety-advocacy group. "Many campus murders have been preventable," Carter says.
Colleges have paid millions to settle lawsuits alleging bad security and have tacitly acknowledged security flaws by tightening safety after a murder. Officials often face criticism and occasional legal sanctions.
In March, Edward Waters College in Jacksonville paid $2.75 million to the parents of a freshman who was shot to death at his dorm in 2004. College security director Timothy Rose said that with more security, student Jonathan Glenn "would have had a chance."
University of North Carolina-Charlotte administrator James Dixon III left his job and pleaded guilty to forgery after his son was convicted of raping and strangling a student in her university dorm in 2004. Dixon had lied on his son's admission application, omitting recent criminal charges. "It wasn't like (the killer) just out of the blue lost his mind," says Thom Goolsby, a lawyer suing UNC on behalf of victim Jessica Faulkner's parents. "He was a ticking time bomb." 
Share this story:
