Lightpost
How to change your mindset when you go from full-time to freelance
Becoming a freelancer is a lifestyle change as well as a career change — for the first time, you may not be receiving a consistent paycheck every month or working that traditional 9-to-5.

Freelancer success story: Meet cycling coach Eddie Mitchell
This freelancer found his niche as a freelancer -- and hit the road fast.

Creative ways to make a freelance resume stand out
When you’re a freelancer trying to attract clients, constructing a creative and compelling resume or portfolio should be top-of-list.

Awesome conferences you should check out if you're a freelancer
Conferences can be exhausting in the best kind of way. Hustling from one panel to the next, getting inspired to do better work, being surrounded by — and making connections with — people as passionate as you are about your profession.

Great job boards to scope out for freelance jobs
As any long-timer will tell you, there's freelancing in theory (Set your schedule! Choose your clients!) and there's freelancing in practice (Wait for payment! Get assignments haphazardly!). So, let’s get real for a minute.

What to do when the freelance business gets slow: Productivity tips for your down time
As a freelancer, entrepreneur, moonlighter, or small business owner, this time of year can seem daunting.

How to make easy money as you're building your freelance career
So you land your first freelance gig! Awesome! And then it hits you. You need five more gigs for the month to pay the rent. Gulp. What now? Don’t panic. It’s time to get resourceful.

Taxes, healthcare and more: What the Trump presidency means for freelancers
There’s no definitive answer about how the Trump administration will affect the freelancing world, but one thing is clear — the number of freelancers continues to swell, coming in at 55 million in 2016, 2 million more than in 2014.

How to be the most prepared freelancer this tax season
Working for yourself has some major perks. You get to take on the work you want, complete it on your own timeline and charge rates you set yourself. Unfortunately, being self-employed also entails some less savory parts of business too — like taxes.

Free tech resources essential to the freelancer
Welcome to the gig economy: where technology and the rise of independent work has spurred on a new force of entrepreneurs and self-employed workers.

The best tools to work securely online as a freelancer
Be a smart freelancer with these essential security tools, tips and suggestions.

How to manage your finances as an on-demand worker
As companies like Uber, AirBNB, and GrubHub shape the economy with their on-demand models, the work world continues to evolve.

The best way to ask for awesome endorsements
What better way to grow your freelance business than to do good work and make good impressions? Those impressions written down are called endorsements. And believe us experts here at Lightpost, endorsements go a long way.

How to reach out and use your network as a new freelancer
Woo hoo, networking! I bet you're imagYour network is here to help you when you're just starting to get work as a freelancer.

Score big: Learn how to create an awesome freelance proposal and contract
This article is part 7 (of 10) of Lightpost, a new USA TODAY Network series sourced by experts and focused on helping you achieve your goals.

Money, money, money: How to decide on the right rate to charge as a new freelancer
It can all start with a simple Google. “How much should I charge for ____?” Pricing yourself correctly is a front-and-center concern for all freelancers, and the masses have definitely stepped up to provide their opinions and experience.

Setting yourself up for success with basic freelance rules, guidelines and infrastructure (oh my!)
This article is part 8 (of 10) of Lightpost, a new USA TODAY Network series sourced by experts and focused on helping you achieve your goals.

7 ways to stay inspired when you work from home
Work, laundry, work, play with kids, work, work out…

LinkedIn unveils helpful new way for freelancers to find work
Plus: If you’re a freelancer, check out the South — as well as the healthcare and pharmaceutical industry.

Awesome online learning resources to grow skills as a freelancer
It's spring break -- why not go back to school?

How to be best prepared for an audit as a freelancer? Assume you'll be audited
Freelancers have a higher chance of being audited. What can you do to be prepared?

The real deal on goal-setting and moving forward as a freelancer
Take a step back. Are you enjoying the work you are doing? As you look toward the future, now’s the time to redo or revise your goals worksheet. Look toward the future and don’t be afraid to write down exactly what you want.

The skinny about freelance money: How to get comfortable with income, taxes and expenses
“It can vary by industry, but the standard is that you get paid within 30 days of your invoice. So you need to track this and on day 30, get on the phone and ask.

If a freelancer builds a personal brand and no one can see it, did they even build it all? Or: How to be seen and noticed online
“Resumes do not mean a whole lot in the freelancing world, because resumes tell people who you are and what you can do.

Cheat-sheet to freelance genius: Highlight your skills and thrive in the best market
Freelancing is all about positioning. Here's how to ensure you're in the right spot.

5 tips on how to optimize your resume to make it in the freelance world
You are your own brand when you're a freelancer. Follow these tips to get noticed.

Happy Valentine's Day! Here's how to navigate office romances
41% of workers have dated a coworker, and 5% have left a job because of it. How are you navigating your office romance?

6 major challenges of coworking spaces -- and how to get over them
Coworking is one of the newest trends for freelancers and entrepreneurs, but it's not without its challenges.

If a freelancer builds a personal brand and no one can see it, did they even build it all? Or: How to be seen and noticed online
You've built your brand. You've checked it twice. But how are people going to see you?! In the last checklist, you learned why your resume isn't just your resume, but the core of a personal brand you're building.

Networking 411: How to reach out and use your network as a new freelancer
Woo hoo, networking! I bet you're imagining awkward events with "Hello, my name is..." stickers and a collection of business cards you neither want nor asked for. Well, networking is crucial for freelancers.

Money, money, money: How to decide on the right rate to charge as a new freelancer
How much money should you charge? Here's advice on to get to a number everyone's happy with.

Score big: Learn how to create an awesome freelance proposal and contract
You're starting to land clients and find jobs you're qualified for to pitch them. Now what? Here's the run-down on where to find jobs, how to pitch them, and what to look for in a contract.

Setting yourself up for success with basic freelance rules, guidelines and infrastructure (oh my!)
From time management and setting aside your perfect work space to asking the right questions ahead of time, there are lots of things you can do to set yourself up for success in your first freelance jobs. Check it out.

The skinny about freelance money: How to get comfortable with income, taxes and expenses
Money. Taxes. Finances. Are you cringing yet? Well, it doesn't have to be that complicated. Here's a guide for first-time freelancers.

You're more than just a resume: How to refine your personal brand then own it
So yeah, you're pretty awesome. You know it. I know it.

Cheat-sheet to freelance genius: Highlight your skills and thrive in the best market
Freelancing is all about positioning. Here's how to ensure you're in the right spot.
