Taste New York's cutting-edge food and beverage tech
What has truly set Booker and Dax apart from other cocktail bars is the use of technology and scientific methods to add texture, temperature and flavor to the drinks. A favorite tool of bartenders is the ‘red-hot poker,’ a 1,500-degree contraption used to caramelize the sugars in alcohol. Gabriele Stabile
Last SlideNext Slide

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
All you need to do is walk down a New York City street, dodging locals entranced by the latest iPhone or flying by on hover boards, to see that this city is obsessed with the latest technology. And that love extends to restaurants, bakeries and bars, which are incorporating technology into their preparation and presentation to set themselves apart.
The benefits of utilizing cutting-edge tech can be easily seen at the flagship candy superstore Dylan’s Candy Bar, which recently installed Katjes Magic Candy Factory, America’s first 3D gummy printer. The instantly-popular device comes preloaded with a variety of gummy designs and the option to create your own. "Personalization is a huge trend, not just in candy, but in everything we buy now,” explains Melissa Snover of Katjes Magic Candy Factory, which is up and running at five Dylan's locations.
Peter Zaharatos of Long Island City’s Sugarcube bakery would certainly agree. “Anything’s possible with 3D printing,” he says, a motto that has led him to create some seriously impressive treats. The former architect and sculptor now focuses his sketching skills on designing intricate molds for chocolates and cakes that he brings to life using the in-store 3D printer. These geometric confections — and the opportunity to personalize one's own designs — has helped the shop make a name for itself in less than six months of operation.
Of course, 3D printing isn't the only advancement. Bartenders at Manhattan’s Booker and Dax have been exploring ways to use high-tech tools in mixology since the cocktail bar opened in 2012, which has won them a loyal fan base of experimental sippers. Technology and scientific methods add texture, temperature and flavor to the drinks, from a 1,500-degree contraption used to caramelize the sugars in alcohol to the use of centrifuges to separate liquid and solid ingredients.
Generating new buzz on the scene is the seasonal “LED cocktail” at Lot 45, which is served only after 9 p.m. to make the most of its impact. The concoction of vodka, banana liquor, simple syrup and lemon juice is poured into a glass resting on a small LED light. Then drops of homemade Hibiscus syrup and Thai pea flower syrup create a lava lamp-like effect and eventually turn the glowing drink a vibrant pink.
Over at Bell Book & Candle, technology itself wasn’t the aim when Mick O’Sullivan wanted to grow his own produce within the confines of Manhattan real estate. The solution is an urban farming technique called aeroponic gardening, which allows him to plant his own tomatoes, lettuce and other greens from the comfort of his own rooftop. The garden has become an attraction in itself, with its sweeping views of the Manhattan skyline dotted with impossibly fresh produce. O’Sullivan says he would “absolutely” suggest the technology to other restauranteurs, adding the process is actually quite “therapeutic.”
And isn’t a little relaxation and good food just what all busy, tech-obsessed New Yorkers could really use, anyway?
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/28PAQCa
