New York John F. Kennedy International Airport Guide
Contact information and flight status
panynj.gov/airports/jfk.html; 718-244-4444 (24 hours)
Checkpoint savvy
Busiest times: Terminal 1: 2 p.m.- 5 p.m. Terminals 2 and 3: 3 p.m. - 6 p.m. Terminal 4: 3 p.m. - 8 p.m. Terminal 5: 6 a.m. - 8 a.m. Terminal 7: 3 p.m. - 7 p.m. Terminal 8: 2 p.m. - 4 p.m.
Workarounds: Each terminal at JFK is a stand-alone entity. Terminal 4 has "split checkpoints." The A and B concourses have separate checkpoints.
Depending on your airline and your status with TSA, expedited TSA PreCheck lanes may be available.
Parking
Parking information: 718-244-4080 (24 hours). Parking reservations available for a fee.
Most convenient: Blue/Yellow Lots: $10/hour; $39/day. Green/Red/Orange Lots: $8/hour, $35/day. See more options.
Least expensive: Long-term lot 4 miles from terminals, on Lefferts Boulevard, $18/day. See more options.
Cellphone lot: Located just off the Van Wyck Expressway, near entrance to airport. 373 spaces. Note: There's a Kiss & Fly lot at the AirTrain JFK Lefferts Boulevard Station. Ride free from there on AirTrain to terminals.
Transportation to/from city
Most convenient: Taxi to Manhattan, $52 flat fare, plus tolls/tips. Travel time: 40 minutes to 1 hour. Sample fares to other destinations. JFK AirTrain to JFK Transit Connections: MTA New York City Transit subways and buses and the Long Island Rail Road is a less expensive and, at times, faster option. See more options.
Least expensive/other options: The JFK AirTrain links to numerous public transit options, including subways and buses. The NYC Airporter bus runs between JFK and Manhattan (Grand Central, Penn Station, Port Authority Bus Terminal, with free Wi-Fi and a free shuttle to Times Square and mid-town hotels between 23rd and 63rd Streets). Fare: $16 (RT $30). Travel time: About 90 minutes. MTA Bus Service: Three routes serve the airport and nearby neighborhoods. Fare: $2.50 (plus $1 for MetroCard)
Wi-Fi and charging stations
Complimentary 30-minute Wi-Fi sessions are available in all terminals. Additional Wi-Fi service available via Boingo. JetBlue provides free wireless Internet service throughout Terminal 5.
Free unlimited Wi-Fi available in gate areas and restaurants in Terminal 2 (Delta) and in Terminal 5 (JetBlue) via OTG-provided iPads, which also have power ports.
Complimentary power charging poles and power ports are in each terminal.
Go local
Good choice for local gifts: Discover New York, in most terminals, offers N.Y.-themed souvenirs. Newsstands such as Hudson News (Terminals 1, 2 and 4) and HDS Press Relay (Terminal 3) also sell NYC sports caps, T-shirts and souvenirs. Terminal 5: Muji to Go. Terminal 8: Metropolitan Museum of Art Shop. See more options.
Good choice for local food: Terminal 1: Idlewild Bar (features New York wines). Terminal 2: Croque Madame (sandwiches), French Meadow Bakery, Todd English's Bonfire Steakhouse, Balducci's. Terminal 4: Palm Bar and Grill, Uptown Brasserie, Shake Shack, Blue Smoke on the Road (barbecue), Cake Tin. Terminal 5: La Vie (Parisian-style café), Deep Blue (sushi), Piquillo (Spanish tapas), 5ive Steak, AeroNuova (Italian). Terminal 7: BonFire Restaurant by Todd English, Balducci's Market. Terminal 8: Bobby Van's Steak House, Brooklyn National Deli. See more options.
Tips and tidbits
JFK has pet-relief areas outside the arrivals area of each terminal and, indoors, in Terminals 4 and 5 (JetBlue), luggage storage in Terminals 1 and 4 (arrivals), and four chapels (Jewish, Catholic, Protestant and multi-faith) on the upper level of Terminal 4. A stand-alone lactation station for nursing moms (next to the Kids Play area at Gate 12) and a branch of Be Relax Spa are in JetBlue's T5.
Nearby layover option
Coney Island amusement park and the New York Aquarium are 15 miles from JFK. Belmont Race Track is 9 miles away.
Your tips and picks?
Please share your time and money-saving tips, favorite restaurants, bars and stores in comments below.
These guides are written by Harriet Baskas, who is the author of six books, including the airport guidebook Stuck at the Airport and a blog of the same name.
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/11k6qK4
