Do the police really racially profile? Your Say
Readers talk stop-and-frisk and the tense relationship between cops, minorities.

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Letter to the editor: 
I'm a 52-year-old Hispanic American. I have a lengthy criminal past with jail time in two different counties in California and I've also been to prison. I have driven while intoxicated a few times and dropped out of high school. And in my experience, the rules are very simple with police and corrections officers. When they tell you to do something — sit down, don't talk, stand up, walk, strip search, hands behind your back, get in the car, pull over, hands outside your pockets, hands on the wall, and all the other directions they give you — you do it. It's a real simple rule to follow.
Related content:
What I have noticed in jails and prisons is there are certain people who seem to follow these rules more than others. Follow the orders given. It's simple. It's a cat-and-mouse game, and always has been. Do the crime, do the time and don't whine. Again, simple rules. I was a slow learner, however.
I now have two businesses. Life is great, and I am truly blessed. To sum it all up, a lot of police officers and corrections officers helped me get where I am today. Because a few took the time to listen and offer guidance. Not every police officer in America is good at their job, but from what I've seen most of them are. I never had a major problem with any of them, unless I disobeyed their orders. It doesn't matter where you come from or what your parents did to you, it's a choice to get better or worse. It's all a choice and we all have to choose every day, all day, little choices and big choices.
Rudy Perez; Newport Beach, Calif.
According to the ACLU of Wisconsin, the Milwaukee Police Department performs thousands of illegal stop-and-frisks targeting African Americans and Latinos every year. Facebook comments are edited for clarity and grammar: 
Wow. Milwaukee is between a rock and a hard place. Crime is skyrocketing and the city's hands are being tied. At least the innocent gang bangers are being protected. Other residents? Not so much.
— Rich Charts 
I like how people who claim to be patriots and claim to support and defend the Constitution don't have a problem throwing it out the window when it becomes inconvenient for them. Stop-and-frisk is unconstitutional no matter how you slice it.
I support the good cops out there, they are one of the pillars or our society. But an unlawful search is just that. If they want to maintain the policy of stop-and-frisk in Wisconsin then the public should get the protection of a reverse fine or censure of some kind when the stop turns up nothing.
— Mark Smith
@USATODAY sounds more like the crazy sheriff!
— OGvoyous (@ogvoyous) February 22, 2017
This has been tried in Chicago and has been an utter failure.
— Carl Meyer
Profiling is done because it works.
— Bill Andrews​
@USATODAY good. Hope they lose
— Coco (@msmassie16) February 22, 2017
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2mrPILt
