'Jolie effect': Could her candor help save lives?
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story misspelled a name: Susan K. Boolbol, chief of breast surgery at Mount Sinai Beth Israel Hospital in New York.
Sometimes celebrities share too much in public; sometimes celeb sharing can help save lives. Angelina Jolie, an otherwise fairly discreet mega-movie star (she doesn't even tweet), falls into the latter category.
Again.
Jolie published Tuesday another candid essay on why she chose surgery to remove her ovaries and fallopian tubes: to help reduce her chances of getting killer cancers after genetic testing suggested she was at an elevated risk.
It comes two years after she published another essay, also in The New York Times, in which she disclosed that because she has the breast cancer gene mutation and a family history, she had chosen to get a prophylactic double mastectomy to reduce her high risk of developing fatal breast cancer.
Once again, she's being applauded for sharing by cancer experts who say the 39-year-old filmmaker and globally admired humanitarian activist switches a spotlight on diseases that few other Americans could provide.
Call it the Angelina Jolie effect. It's not unlike the Katie Couric effect, after the then-NBC newswoman underwent a colonoscopy on TV to call attention to the need for such exams following her first husband's death from colon cancer.
Result: a huge uptick in such screenings, says Richard Wender, chief cancer-control officer for the American Cancer Society in Atlanta, the largest anti-cancer organization in America.
Couric, and now Jolie, "illustrate the enormous influence that really famous people can have," says Wender.
"I admire (Jolie's) pieces, I think she's been a wonderful spokesperson for herself and the illnesses she's faced, and she's been very courageous in being very public about it," Wender says.
In both essays, Jolie stressed that she made these decisions based on her own research and on her doctors' recommendations on what was best for her at this particular time.
But telling the world about it again means she's brought attention to scary female cancers that are hard to detect until it's too late and, just as important, she raises the issue of genetic testing for women who might be at greater risk of getting them.
"This puts a very positive spin on the genetic testing-and-results arena," says Susan Boolbol, chief of breast surgery at Mount Sinai Beth Israel Hospital in New York.
"Because her message, which should be everyone's message, is this is my personal choice, it's not the right choice for everyone but we should all be aware of our options. Knowledge is power, that's what I say to my patients every day," Boolbol says.
Alarm is not the answer, Jolie's essay suggests. Unnecessary surgeries are not the answer. Awareness is an answer.
"She said this decision is right for me and at the right time in my life, but women need to know their family history and, if it's called for, to be tested so they can make the right choices for themselves," adds Wender.
Karen Lu, director of the high-risk ovarian cancer screening clinic at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, says Jolie's essays have been been both medically and emotionally accurate, and thus resonate with women.
Jolie "is providing a huge service to a group of women we call 'previvors,'" says Lu.
"It helps put ovarian cancer on the map, equivalent to breast cancer," says Robert DeBernardo a gynecologic oncologist and director of Minimally Invasive Surgery in Cleveland Clinic's Ob/Gyn & Women's Health Institute.
Hollywood public-relations experts were even more effusive in their praise of Jolie.
"She is quite simply saving lives by her breathtaking honesty," says Howard Bragman, vice chairman of Reputation.com, a longtime admirer of Jolie and a veteran publicist.
"She's teaching a valuable lesson that disease is not something we should be ashamed of but something to conquer," he says. "And she reminds us that the only way to beat it is via awareness, discussion and testing.
"For someone who many think of as one of the most physically beautiful women in the world, this shows her heart is as beautiful as her exterior," he added.
Other stars with Twitter accounts tweeted their admiration.
To women who follow me on here: I truly hope you take a few minutes to read this moving & informative oped. http://t.co/JYhEfnSaNs
— Mindy Kaling (@mindykaling) March 24, 2015
Angelina Jolie: "I am now in menopause." How many women in Hollywood say this? Very brave about her hysterectomy. http://t.co/ZctIowJjpG
— Melissa Silverstein (@melsil) March 24, 2015
In fact, Jolie's essay provoked an outpouring of tweets, and many of them were in foreign languages, suggesting that her reach is indeed worldwide.
Angelina Jolie a subi une ablation préventive des ovaires http://t.co/R9PRXDVVgX#france#french
— France agent (@France_agent) March 24, 2015
Could her candor help save lives? Possibly but the research on this is complicated, says Wender. After Jolie's first essay, there was an increase in breast-removal surgeries, he says.
"That could contribute to a reduction in the death rate from breast cancer but the research suggests that some women who removed a second (after cancer was found in the other) were at a relatively low lifetime risk of developing in the other breast," he says. 
"There's a general feeling in the medical community that women are more alarmed about developing cancer in the other breast than they need to be."
Instead, regular screening remains a good option for these women, he says.
"Surgery is the recommended procedure for women who have the BRCA1 gene, not for those without a genetic predisposition for being at high risk for ovarian cancer," says Wender.
"I would be shocked if more women don't ask for this (testing)," as a result of Jolie's experience, he said. "But compared to breast cancer, ovarian cancer is far less common."
The rate of breast cancer diagnoses is 10 times the rate of ovarian cancer diagnoses, he said.
In fact, the average woman doesn't have to worry about genetic testing, says Marleen Meyers, an oncologist and director of the survivorship program at New York University's Perlmutter Cancer Center.
"I think it's a wonderful thing to make people aware, but I also hope that people don't assume her particular path should be their path," Meyers says.
Mitchell Gaynor, a New York oncologist and author of The Gene Therapy Plan, says preventative surgery to remove ovaries and fallopian tubes sometimes is not an option, if a woman "has another cancer already such as pancreatic, stomach, or colon cancer which has spread to distant organs," he says.
Before Jolie's latest sharing, "we had not seen a spike in genetic testing, and if we do see one (now), that would not be a bad thing," adds Boolbol.
"This is a woman who looked at her family history and said I need to be tested. And she got the test, but she didn't act right away; she researched it and made the right decision at the right time."
The take-away message, she said, is "discuss the options with your physicians, know your personal history, your family history or what you can of it, and speak to your doctor about it. Are there tests I can or should be doing?"
Contributing: Liz Szabo

 Marriage, three film projects and a new surgery. It's been a big year for Angelina Jolie. We take a look back, starting with a shot of Jolie and Brad Pitt making quite a sexy pair at the 2014 BAFTA awards. ANDREW COWIE, AFP/Getty Images
