USA TODAY NETWORK Partners with Facebook to Raise Money for Local Charities This Holiday Season
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
USA TODAY NETWORK launched their new corporate social responsibility program, “A Community Thrives”, this year to empower philanthropic organizations in communities across the country. The company gave a total of $600,000 in grants to nine charities across the country in the categories of Wellness, Education, and Arts and Culture. This coming week, USA TODAY NETWORK is collaborating with Facebook to support three of the 2017 grant recipients by live broadcasting fundraising events that will raise money for these organizations.
On Tuesday, The Poughkeepsie Journal is going live with Poughkeepsie Alliance. Local chefs will be asked to create signature dishes and along the way, user donations will toss obstacles at them. Things like losing their kitchen knives, or only being able to cook in a microwave are not out the question. At the end, a judge will determine the best dishes.
On Wednesday, Florida Today is going live with Promise in Brevard. They invited local artists, young adults, and community members to help create a mural in just under an hour. They’ll be asking for donations and in turn, donors get to say what they want painted on the mural. The community will literally be coming together to make something beautiful for this local organization.
Also on Wednesday, The Tennessean and Mary’s Magical Place are teaming up on Facebook Live. Local first responders will go head-to-head to build the best gingerbread house while donations from viewers will throw obstacles at them, making for an interesting competition. Maybe they will lose their icing or maybe they will have to tie their hands together – you’ll have to tune in to find out.
These challenges are all in good fun and for a good cause. “This campaign with Facebook is an exciting way to raise money for charities across our USA TODAY NETWORK local community footprint,” said Andy Yost, CMO, Gannett | USA TODAY NETWORK. “From the Gannett Foundation to our corporate social responsibility program ‘A Community Thrives’, we support empowering community members to take on local challenges and look forward to extending our reach through this Facebook campaign.”
If you’d like to tune in to any or all of these Live Streams, keep a close eye on Florida Today, The Poughkeepsie Journal, and The Tennessean’s Facebook page.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2D0hMfp
