NFL coaching tracker: Latest news on candidates, job openings
CLOSE

 Check out the coaches that won't be coming back for the 2018 season. USA TODAY Sports

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 1 COMMENTEMAILMORE
The NFL coaching carousel is spinning at full speed, with several jobs opening up as the season closed down.
Stay here for all the latest news on every vacancy and the candidates (listed alphabetically) who could fill them.
Giants
HIRED: New York announced a long-anticipated move by hiring Vikings offensive coordinator Pat Shurmur one day after Minnesota's loss in the NFC Championship Game. This is Shurmur's second stint as a head coach after he led the Browns from 2011-12.
Colts
Candidates: Patriots offensive coordinator Josh McDaniels (interviewed Jan. 3), Seahawks defensive coordinator Kris Richard (interviewed Jan. 5), Baylor coach Matt Rhule (interviewed this week, per ESPN), Chiefs special teams coordinator Dave Toub, Texans defensive coordinator Mike Vrabel, Panthers defensive coordinator Steve Wilks
Latest: McDaniels appears to have this one wrapped up. A deal is expected once the Patriots are out of the playoffs. His pairing with Andrew Luck will make for one of next season's most interesting story lines.
Lions
Candidates: Lions offensive coordinator Jim Bob Cooter (interviewed Jan. 2), Lions offensive coordinator Patriots offensive coordinator Josh McDaniels, Packers running backs/associate head coach Winston Moss (interviewed Jan. 4), Patriots defensive coordinator Matt Patricia (interviewed Jan. 5), Vikings offensive coordinator Pat Shurmur, Texans defensive coordinator Mike Vrabel (interviewed Jan. 3), Panthers defensive coordinator Steve Wilks
Latest: By all accounts, Patricia is the call here. Detroit has told its other candidates that it expects to name the Patriots defensive coordinator its next coach, per reports.
Titans
HIRED: Mike Vrabel. The three-time Super Bowl champion linebacker from the New England Patriots made a quick rise through the coaching ranks. He started as linebackers coach with the Houston Texans in 2014, and was promoted to defensive coordinator for the 2017 season.
Bears
HIRED: Matt Nagy. The former Chiefs offensive coordinator will be tasked with reviving the league's worst passing attack and developing Mitchell Trubisky after the QB's uneven rookie season.
Cardinals
HIRED: Steve Wilks. The former Panthers defensive coordinator has plenty of talent to work with, but how he handles an offense that will be looking for a new quarterback after Carson Palmer's retirement could define the early part of his tenure.
Raiders
HIRED: Jon Gruden. The former Raiders coach is back for a second go-around in Oakland. 
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 1 COMMENTEMAILMORE
