50 states: 50 gifts of taste
Alabama and barbecue go together like, well, grilled meat and barbecue sauce. Pour some southern flair onto chicken, pork or seafood with Big Bob Gibson’s Original White Sauce, which has been around since 1925. Order at bigbobgibson.com. Ben Fink
 The flavors of the Southwest are the stars of the show at Tucson Tamale Company. While green chile and cheese (pictured) is a classic, try red chile beef tamales, or chocolate and cherry tamales for dessert. Order at tucsontamale.com. Sarah Ling
 It’s said that cheese dip was born in Arkansas in 1935 at Little Mexico (now Mexico Chiquito) in Hot Springs, and there’s even an annual World Championship Cheese Dip Festival in Little Rock. In West Memphis, Ark., family-owned Pancho's Mexican Foods sells its dips at stores in 17 states and ships nationwide via panchoscheesedip.com. Julia Eason
 For more than 20 years, Dogfish Head has been Delaware's destination brewery. Try the highly acclaimed 90 Minute IPA (released in 2001), which is available in 36 states and on tap in the Milton, Del., tasting room. Fans can also purchase merch and barware on the brewery's website for gifts. courtesy of Dogfish Head Craft Brewery
 With 1,350 miles of coastline, it’s no surprise that one of the best flavors from the Sunshine State comes from the surrounding salty waters. Florida Pure Sea Salt features natural and infused salts such as maple bacon, lemon and Sriracha, to name a few. Shop regional salts and gift packs at floridapureseasalt.com. Erin Gonzalez
 Its nickname may be the Peach State, but Georgia has so many more flavors to offer, like blueberries. In fact, blueberries are a bigger moneymaker for the state than peaches. Try Blueberry Lemon Thyme preserves (or Peach Bourbon Cardamom preserves) from Blackberry Patch in Thomasville via blackberrypatch.com. Gabriel Gibson
 Deep-dish pizza is as big a part of Chicago as Chicago is a part of Illinois. Take one bite of ‘za at Lou Malnati’s Pizzeria, and you’ll quickly realize why it’s such a crowd-pleaser. Ship a pizza nationwide via tastesofchicago.com. A. Alexander
 Sugar Cream Pie takes the cake in Indiana, and Wicks Pies Inc. is the granddaddy of Hoosier State bakers. The family business makes more than 12 million pies annually (sold in 25 states) using the family recipe that originated in the 1800s. Order or find a retailer at wickspies.com. Duane Wickersham
 The Bluegrass State is synonymous with bourbon, and there's more than one way to taste it. Ruth Hanly Booe introduced bourbon balls in the late 1930s, and her family still makes hundreds of varieties using her time-honored traditional methods at Rebecca Ruth candy factory in Frankfort, Ky. Order the chocolate candy at rebeccaruth.stores.yahoo.net. courtesy of the Kentucky Department of Travel
 It’s hard to choose just one flavor to represent Louisiana, but the seafood gumbo at Prejean’s Restaurant in Lafayette is definitely one to try. (Or opt for the chicken and sausage gumbo if seafood’s not your cup of…gumbo.) Order at cajungrocer.com. Maggie Bowles, courtesy of the Louisiana Office of Tourism
 Think of Maine and you have to think of lobster. Whether dipped in clarified butter, served with a hint of mayo on a toasted roll, or blended into a rich mac and cheese, lobster’s the way to go in Vacationland. Order at getmainelobster.com. courtesy of Get Maine Lobster
 Though its known for its crabs, another Maryland taste to try is its official state dessert: Smith Island Cake. Thin layers of cake separated by sweet icing will make your mouth water even as you place your order. Order one at smithislandcake.com. Somerset County Tourism
 To say that Charles Baldwin & Sons in West Stockbridge, Mass., know their extracts is an understatement: established in 1888 the company has passed through several generations of the family. Try the vanilla in your Boston Cream Pie recipe by ordering at baldwinextracts.com. M. Powell
 Talk to Michiganders from the U.P., and they’ll likely tell you about pasties, or meat hand pies. Aside from the traditional flavors of beef, pork, rutabaga, potato, onion and carrot, Roy's Pasties & Bakery in Houghton, Mich., also offers turkey cranberry, pizza and even vegetarian. Try them via royspasties.com. Adam Johnson, Brockit Inc.
 Jucy Lucy isn’t just fun to say, it’s delicious to eat, as Minnesotans know well. When the cheese oozes from the center of the burger patty, you know you’ve got a good one. Pick one up at Twinburger in Concourse G of the Minneapolis/St. Paul International Airport. courtesy of OTG
 Apple cider is New Hampshire’s official state drink, and Applecrest Farm Orchards in Hampton Falls, N.H., is the oldest and largest apple orchard in the state. Order apples, New Hampshire maple syrup and more at applecrest.com, or visit in person for apple cider doughnuts. courtesy of Applecrest Farm
 Think of the Jersey Shore and varying images may pop into mind, and one edible association is salt water taffy. Shriver’s Salt Water Taffy has been satiating the sweet tooth since 1898 in Ocean City, N.J. and ships via shrivers.com. courtesy of Shriver's
 Chile is a quintessential taste of New Mexico, and can be found in favorite dishes such as enchiladas, stuffed sopapillas and Navajao tacos. Chiles are such a part of New Mexico that the official state question is, “red or green?” Order fresh or frozen chiles, salsas and sauces from hatchchileexpress.com. Boone Clemmons
 Whoopie Pies a Pennsylvania Dutch tradition in Lancaster County. Bite into more than 100 flavors of the cake-like cookie sandwiches with a cream center at the annual Whoopie Pie Festival in September or order year-round at kitchenkettle.com. courtesy of Discover Lancaster
 Despite the name, New York System wieners can only be found in Rhode Island and are topped with celery salt, mustard and meat sauce. An iconic Rhode Island spot is Olneyville New York System, where a special blend of spices is available so you can fix your own at home. Order at olneyvillenewyorksystem.com. N. Millard, GoProvidence.com
 Low country cuisine is simply divine, and a classic dish of shrimp 'n' grits can be found on nearly any South Carolinian restaurant menu. In Charleston, S.C., Husk makes a mouthwatering version (pictured), and you can make your own at home with a mix from Gullah Gourmet (gullahgourmet.com). Andrea Behrends, courtesy of Explore Charleston
 Chislic is a taste that’s very specific to South Dakota: cubed red meat, oftentimes beef, venison or lamb, grilled or fried. One of the most popular places from which to order the snack is Kaylor Locker in Kaylor, S.D., where it's pulled from the locker and shipped straight to your door. Call 605-583-4472 to order. courtesy of South Dakota Department of Tourism
 Goo Goo Clusters have been a Nashville, Tenn., tradition for more than 100 years. When Standard Candy Company mounded up caramel, marshmallow nougat, fresh roasted peanuts and milk chocolate, candy history was made. Visit the shop and dessert bar in Nashville, or order at googoo.com. Katie Jacobs
 Texas chili is meat and chiles and not much else, and one of the best places to chow down on a bowl is Tolbert’s Restaurant & Chili Parlor in Grapevine, Texas. Inspired by his passion for chili, Frank X. Tolbert wrote 'A Bowl of Red' in 1972, which is available in the restaurant’s shop or at tolbertsrestaurant.com. courtesy of Grapveine Convention & Visitor Bureau
 Le Mars, Iowa is known as the Ice Cream Capital of the World, and is home to the Blue Bunny Ice Cream Parlor & Museum. The city has more than 50 ice cream sculptures to see. Bill Nellans, courtesy of the Iowa Tourism Office
 Wellington, Kansas is called the Wheat Capital of the World, and the Wellington Area Chamber of Commerce and Convention and Visitors Bureau organized a Sumner County Wheat Capital of the World Tour with 10 stops in 2012. Today, visitors can catch the Kansas Wheat Festival in July. Phil White, courtesy Wellington Area Chamber of Commerce/Convention and Visitors Bureau
 Reuters called Owensboro, Ky., the burgoo capital of the world in 2007, as the city is one of few places still serving the stew known for originating with mutton. Owensboro hosts the International Bar-B-Q Festival each May where visitors can try traditional burgoo (pictured) and mutton (Food Republic labeled the city the mutton capital of the world in 2012). Bryan Leazenby
 The Louisiana Legislature named Breaux Bridge, La., the Crawfish Capital of the World in 1959. Try the Cajun Country specialty at restaurants like Crazy About Crawfish or the Crawfish Festival with live music in May. courtesy of the St. Martin Parish Tourist Commission
 Nevada isn't necessarily known for food capitals, but Las Vegas is undoubtedly the celebrity chef capital of the world with dozens of famous names lining the Strip. Dine at restaurants from Gordon Ramsay, Giada de Laurentiis, Nobu Matsuhisa, Thomas Keller, Guy Savoy and more stars, or catch many of them at the annual Vegas Uncork'd by Bon Appetit food festival in May. courtesy of Vegas Uncork'd
 New England's other maple capital (after Vermont), New Hampshire has more than 70 sugar houses. Visit Folsom's Sugar House in Chester, N.H., which has a shop full of local maple products, during Maple Month or Maple Weekend in March. New Hampshire Division of Travel & Tourism
 One of several destinations claiming to be the Blueberry Capital of the World, NJ.com says Hammonton, N.J., is more accurately the "fresh blueberry capital of the world." Taste the local specialty at DiMeo Farms, which offers "organic, Non-GMO, Heirloom blueberries" and "u-pick blueberries on [a] 100-year-old family blueberry farm and blueberry plants nursery." courtesy of DiMeo Farms
 Actually a part of metro Augusta, Ga., Johnston, S.C., claims the Peach Capital of the World title as it produces more peaches than anywhere but California. Try the official state fruit at Sara's Fresh Market's three locations, which offer Titan Farms Peaches (the state's largest grower). courtesy of the Edgefield County Chamber of Commerce
 Known as a top pheasant-hunting destination, Aberdeen, S.D., is the country's pheasant sandwich capital. The community served pheasant sandwiches to troops passing through in the 1940s. Today, volunteers and CVB staff members carry on that legacy by making pheasant sandwiches for pheasant hunters visiting from out of state annually, and the city hosted its first Pheasant Sandwich Shootout culinary competition this year. Visit in the third week of October during the annual pheasant opener to taste the tradition. courtesy of Aberdeen Area Convention and Visitors Bureau
 A completely unique institution to Arizona, Prescott’s Superstition Meadery brews its own meads and ciders, serving the craft beverages in a taproom and in bottles worldwide. A flight of a dozen ciders and meads offers the most comprehensive tasting, to be paired with tapas and desserts off Superstition’s food menu. courtesy of Superstition Meadery
 Seven varieties of all-natural Arkansas cider are on tap at Black Apple Crossing, which includes live music, trivia and Taco Tuesdays in its mix of cider-fueled weekly events in Springdale. Ciders range from the Cider Gal, made from Gala apples, to the boozy 8% ABV Blackjack, infused with local blackberries. courtesy of Black Apple Crossing
 The California Cider Company’s Ace Cider Pub claims fame as the first cider pub in America. Nine ciders are on tap in Sebastopol, and tasting flights let visitors try every variety. Live music, darts and games keep guests entertained, and outdoor seating, where both dogs and picnics are welcome, completes the relaxed ambiance. courtesy of Sonoma County Tourism
 In Mystic, Conn., B.F. Clyde’s Cider Mill is the oldest steam-powered cider mill in the America, dating back to 1881. Visit for hard cider and apple wine tastings, accompanied by weekend cider making demonstrations led by the sixth generation of the Clyde family in the cider business. courtesy of the Connecticut Office of Tourism
 In Marydel, Del., Rebel Seed opens its tasting room daily and offers guided tours of its cider-making process on weekends. Expect dry, semi-dry and sweet ciders, all of which rebel just a little bit on what you expect a hard cider to taste like. courtesy of Rebel Seed
 In St. Petersburg, Fla., 3 Daughters Brewing has a cider bar and tasting room called The Orchard. Inside, a homemade semi-sweet apple cider and a Florida Key lime cider are on tap, along with guest ciders celebrating the region, like sweet tea, mimosa and dried apricot-flavored ciders. Leisa Rice
 Atlanta’s first hard apple cider maker, Urban Tree Cidery serves its original European-style cider, sweet Georgia-inspired cider and a barrel aged cider in its taproom, which has a BYO food policy and welcomes dogs on the patio. courtesy of Urban Tree Cidery
 Based in Oahu, Paradise Ciders is Hawaii’s first cider maker. The tropical fruit-infused ciders, like the Lei'd Back Lilikoi can be found on tap throughout the islands at bars including Maui Brewing Co. in Waikiki. courtesy of Hawaii Tourism United States
 The only cider bar in Kentucky, Lexington’s Pivot Brewing serves a bevy of its own craft ciders on tap, reserving some taps for “guest ciders” to let drinkers try multiple cider styles. Apples are pressed fresh each harvest season, resulting in a steady rotation of unique ciders. Bevin Morgan
 New to New Orleans as of July, Louisiana’s Broad Street Cider & Ale crafts its own gluten-free, sugar-free ciders in the city. In the tap room, a variety of ciders flavored with unique strands of yeast are up for the tasting and weekend food pop-ups offer something to nosh on while you sip. courtesy of Broad Street Cider & Ale
 Portland, Maine’s Urban Farm Fermentory is about all things fermented and drinkable, from cider to beer, kombucha and mead. The taproom's 22 rotating taps offer ample opportunity to taste and compare unique ciders and learn more about the fermenting process. courtesy of Urban Farm Fermentory
 Boston’s Downeast Cider House infuses New England flare into its craft ciders – flavored with tart Cape Cod cranberries or berries from Maine. In addition to samples on tap and opportunities to fill growlers, Downeast offers weekend tours of its cidery, should you want a more interactive drinking experience. Cambria Grace Photography
 Established in 1946, Blake’s Family Farm is now a third generation-owned family business in Michigan, out of which Blake’s Hard Cider Co. stems. At the cider house in Armada, seasonal and limited-edition ciders ranging from 6% to more than 12% ABV, and flavored with everything from peppers to pumpkins, are served. Andrew Jowett
 Minneapolis’ Sociable Cider Werks opens its industrial taproom and patio to imbibers eager to drink a wide range of alcoholic apple products. Food trucks park outside to fuel drinkers as they taste their way through hopped and flavored ciders, as well as a unique beer-cider hybrid. Tours are offered each Saturday, and the taproom is closed on Tuesdays. courtesy of Sociable Cider Werks
 The cozy cabin that is Montana’s Lockhorn Cider House offers ample space to congregate at wooden benches under animal antlers, or outside by the fireplace to drink gluten-free, sulfite-free cider, accompanied by a gluten-free food menu. courtesy of Lockhorn Cider House
 Expect to taste completely unique ciders in the Ashland taproom of Nebraska’s Glacial Till. Small-batch ciders may be infused with cold brew or aged in bourbon barrels, while seasonal ciders range from pumpkin spice to a winter blend flavored with peppercorns and star anise. courtesy of Glacial Till Vineyard
 Reno, Nev.'s Piñon Bottle Co. is both a bottle shop and beer bar featuring 36 rotating taps and hundreds of bottles and cans for sale. Rare and craft ciders fall into the mix and can be tasted at the shop or taken home for a cozy hard cider night in. courtesy of Piñon Bottle Co.
 Nine taps of cider brewed in Santa Fe are served at New Mexico Hard Cider, along with plenty of Southwestern fare (like Frito Pies, also known as walking tacos), board games and picturesque orchard views. courtesy of New Mexico Hard Cider
 Upstate New York’s Finger Lakes Cider House, a rustic beacon of all things cider, sits just off the Cayuga Wine Trail. Guided tasting flights may be the best way to learn about distinct types of cider before ordering a pint and carrying it out to the porch. Hyper-local small bites and board games make it easy to spend an entire autumn day at this cider spot. courtesy of Finger Lakes Cider House
 In its four years of operation, Urban Orchard Cider Company has already produced 80 styles of cider, and counting, in Asheville, N.C. The family owned and operated company rotates through fruit-infused and hopped cider varieties to serve on tap at the cider house, all of which can be paired with dips, spreads, cheese and charcuterie from local purveyors. courtesy of Urban Orchard Cider Company
 New to North Dakota this month, Wild Terra is the state’s first urban cidery and cider bar. Homemade traditional and seasonal ciders are on tap as well as regionally and nationally sourced ciders intended to broaden the palates of Fargo’s cider drinkers. Brynn Joki
 Just a few miles from downtown Cleveland, Griffin Cider House keeps Ohio’s cider game strong. Founded by an English transplant who deemed the region’s lack of cider bars grim, this cider pub serves English-style craft ciders with a local twist, like the Honey Oak, which is flavored with four varieties of Ohio honey. Cody York
