Poll: The diagnosis is right, but where's the cure?
WASHINGTON — On this Americans agree with President Obama: The economy is getting better — for the rich.
A USA TODAY/Suffolk University poll finds broad skepticism that the proposals the president outlined in his State of the Union Address last week will go anywhere in a Republican-controlled Congress, though. And that's distressing to many, who believe government action could boost their families and narrow the gap between the rich and everybody else.
Richard Siebach Jr., 56, of Northport, on New York's Long Island, is enthusiastic about Obama's proposal to make the first two years of tuition at community colleges free for good students. "You've got to have a degree nowadays," the unemployed mason said in an interview after being polled. "A high school education's not going to get you nowhere."
But its prospects to pass? "Doesn't have a snowball's chance in hell," he says. "The Republicans are going to shoot it down."
The nationwide survey finds crosscurrents that signal a complex political terrain as the White House faces a new Congress and presidential hopefuls in both parties test the waters for the 2016 campaign.
Americans finally seem to be pulling out of the long national funk that hit with the financial meltdown in 2008. While 53% say the country is on the wrong track, 36% say it's headed in the right direction — which may not sound particularly positive but is 10 percentage points higher than it was in the Gallup Poll six months ago.
Assessments of today's economy are getting a bit better. One in four call it good or excellent, and nearly half say it is at least fair. What has improved more dramatically are predictions about the future. Now, 55% say the economy is getting better. Six months ago, just 38% did.
But not everyone is sharing in the benefits, they say. While 43% say the recovery has helped rich people a great deal, just 8% say it's helped the poor a great deal, 6% the working class and 5% the middle class.
Two-thirds say the improving economy has helped the poor, workers and the middle class only a little or not at all.
"There are more possibilities for work, but it doesn't pay enough and it isn't real enough," says Marcella Davis, 62, a retired teacher from Franklin, Texas, who rates the economy as good. "It's full time for a little while, at a factory, with the promise of 'You do a good job, we'll hire you on permanently' after 90 days' probation. The 89th day, you're let go."
The telephone poll of 1,000 adults, taken last Wednesday through Sunday, has a margin of error of +/- 4 percentage points. In follow-up interviews, those surveyed describe ways they have adjusted to navigate the complications of the new economy.
Heidi Edinger, 36, a surgical X-ray technician from Houston, says it's gotten difficult to land a full-time job. "I'm learning how to work (on) contract" and save for retirement in an IRA instead of an employer-sponsored 401(k), she says. "On slow weeks and months it's not that great getting hours, but I do enjoy having a flexible schedule with my son." A single mom, her son is now 17.
Corey Glader, 44, who works for a recycling company, had been living in Duluth, Minn., but moved back to Bellingham, Wash., to be near his 25-year-old daughter, Brianna. Jobs are easier to find in Bellingham, he says, and real estate is so affordable that he's been able to buy a house for the first time.
One more advantage: Washington state's minimum wage this month rose to $9.47 an hour, the highest statewide rate in the country. In Seattle, the minimum wage is going up to $15 an hour. Glader said that increase is going to be "astronomical" for his daughter, who is working at Burger King while studying for certification as a licensed practical nurse.
He doesn't expect much help to be on the way from Washington, D.C., though. "They all have their own agendas and, unfortunately, with a divided house and a different president, it's so hard for them to even come to an agreement on anything."
That said, Americans are almost evenly split between whether it's better to have a divided government: 27% say it's better to have the White House and Congress controlled by the same party; 26% say it's better to have a president from one party, the Congress controlled by the other.
While Democrats controlled Congress when Obama initially was elected in 2008, Republicans gained a majority in the House in the 2010 elections and in the Senate in the midterms last November.
In the poll, nearly half predict that "only a few" of Obama's proposals from the State of the Union Address will be enacted, and another one in five say none of them will.
Most Americans do think the government could help. Just over half say the government could do a great deal or a fair amount to improve economic conditions for them personally. A similar number say the government could decrease the gap between the rich and everyone else.
Jeff Malnar, 46, a corrections officer from Streator, Ill., has little trust in government, though. "You don't have that leader you look to and say, we're going to be OK. You can hope, you can pray, but I don't see how that's going to happen." He's worried that a new union contract being negotiated for July will lead to job cuts or pay cuts. "If I lose money out of my check in any type of way, I lose my house."
Obama's job rating is now 46% approve/48% disapprove, and his approval rating on the economy has bumped up a bit to 48%/47%. Half of those surveyed say he deserves either a great deal or a moderate amount of credit for the improving economy. Congress' approval rating remains dismal, at 14% approve/75% disapprove.
But when it comes to whom voters trust more to make the right decisions about the economy, America is divided: 41% pick Obama, 41% congressional Republicans.

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1K5C7va
