Puppy returns home, 13 days after car crash
USA Today Network
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 Aug. 4, Lotto found the bait set by the Granite State Dog Recovery. Granite State Dog Recovery
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay

Last SlideNext Slide

Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story had the incorrect date for Lotto’s rescue, because of information provided. 
A 6-month-old puppy who ran off after a car crash was just reunited with his owner.
Lotto was riding in the cab of a pickup truck on July 23, when his owner’s boyfriend, who's suspected of falling asleep, lost control of the vehicle.
The truck drove off New Hampshire's Interstate 93 south, rolled over and smashed into a tree. Lotto was last seen running away, across the highway, the Union Leader reports.
Soon people who heard about the crash Facebook messaged the Granite State Dog Recovery, an all-volunteer group dedicated to reuniting lost dogs with families. Just a few hours after the dog ran off, volunteers leapt into action trying to find him — even before they were able to connect with the dog's owner Felicia Haenel of Rhode Island.
When Granite State Dog Recovery was able to speak with Haenel and get photos of her German Shepard, the group posted 250 flyers around a neighborhood near the crash in Bow, N.H.
But, more than a week passed and there wasn't any sign of Lotto. They set traps for days, only attracting a skunk and a bobcat.
Holly Mokrzecki said Haenel was worried Lotto wouldn't be found. Mokrzecki wasn't ready to call it quits though.
"We follow up on every lead," Mokrzecki said. "You don’t leave any stone unturned."
Earlier this week, a man called saying he might have seen Lotto in the woods about 2.5 miles from the crash scene.
Granite State Dog Recovery set a trap with pork roast, sausages and hotdogs, along with a camera. Thursday morning, Lotto hit the jackpot. He was rescued.
A few hours later, mom and pup were reunited.
"He was crying and wagging his tail, very excited to see her," Mokrzecki said.
The German Shepard was covered in about 200 ticks and bruised, but is recovering.
Follow Ashley May on Twitter: @AshleyMayTweets
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2aKRiAs
