Airbnb adds Chenault, pledges next hire for all-male board will be a woman
CLOSE

 The company says it's using a combination of background checks and community input to identify the people it's kicking off the site. Video provided by Newsy Newslook

SAN FRANCISCO — Airbnb is adding outgoing American Express chief executive Kenneth Chenault to its board of directors as the home-sharing service eyes an eventual initial public offering.
Chenault, who was named last week to Facebook's board, is Airbnb's first independent board member.
His addition represents another first for Airbnb. The prominent business leader is the first African-American to join the five-member, all-male board.
When asked about the composition of the board, Airbnb issued a statement pledging the next board hire will be a woman. 
"We are in serious discussions with a number of incredible people about joining our board. The next member will be a woman, and she’ll be joining later this year," Airbnb spokesman Christopher Nulty said in a statement.
Airbnb's three founders — CEO Brian Chesky, Nathan Blecharczyk and Joe Gebbia —and venture capitalists Jeff Jordan and Alfred Lin sit on the board. 
Chenault, who joins the Airbnb board next month, announced in October that he would retire as chairman and CEO of American Express on Feb. 1, capping a 16-year run. 
Seats on the boards of tech companies come with prestige and a big paycheck. They are also seen as being critically important to helping more women and minorities land top spots in tech companies and bringing more diversity to their overwhelmingly white-and-Asian male workforces. Yet women and minorities have been historically overlooked as candidates for board positions.
The next generation of tech companies reflect the same lack of gender diversity in these coveted posts, according to research last year from TheBoardlist, which highlights women qualified to be directors of tech companies. Sixty-eight percent of unicorn technology companies — those high-flyers like Airbnb with billion dollar-plus valuations — have no women on their boards. And that proportion is growing, TheBoardlist found.
Airbnb, founded in 2008, has raised several billion dollars from investors and is valued at more than $30 billion, making it a trailblazer among the unicorn companies. But the current Airbnb board contrasts with Chesky's pledge to transform into a 21st century company that, among other things, expands "diversity and acceptance in the world." He did not provide specific details on how he planned to do that.
Pressure is building from investors to improve gender and racial disparities on boards of directors. 
Women and people of color were picked for a majority of open S&P 500 board seats this year for the first time, according to a survey from recruiting firm Spencer Stuart. The survey found that 36% of 397 independent director slots open in the 2017 proxy season went to women and 20% to minorities.
BlackRock and State Street Global Advisors last year pressured boards to add more diversity by voting against directors who were not taking steps to bring aboard more women and minorities. The growing #MeToo movement and sexual harassment claims against business leaders as well as a growing body of evidence that diversity boosts success and returns have heightened scrutiny of all-male or male-heavy boards.

Women and minorities continue to be severely underrepresented on the boards of tech companies, both public and private.
The proportion of women named to the boards of companies in the Russell 3000 index was 16.2% in 2017, according to research last year from Equilar. For tech companies, that figure was 14.3%, the latest evidence that the industry continues to lag others.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2DK0E0F
