World AIDS Day: I have HIV and I'll work to end this epidemic until I no longer can
Others living with HIV want to know my secret to living well with HIV for 25 years. For me, it comes down to love and support.

CONNECTTWEET 65 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
As the world marks World AIDS Day this month, I will mark 25 years of living and flourishing with HIV.
I say living and flourishing because I am one of the fortunate ones. I have always had excellent medical care. I have the love and support of friends and loved ones. I have a job that I am passionate about at an international development nonprofit that serves communities affected by HIV and AIDS. I get to share my experience of successfully living with HIV with people around the world, and I get to help ensure that our community has a voice and a role in the design and implementation of HIV programs to get us tested, treated and onto life-saving medications. 
I clearly remember my first interview for a position as a coordinator for an HIV peer program. The interviewer, Nancy Kern at the Hawaii Department of Health, legally couldn’t ask me if I was HIV-positive. So she asked how I felt I would be able to support and relate to people living with HIV. I answered with facts and figures and talked about the importance of being compassionate and caring.
As I drove home, I realized I should have disclosed my HIV status. I picked up the phone, called Kern and shared my realization. She laughed and said, “Great, because we want to give you the job.”
I cannot imagine where I would be today if that hadn’t happened. 
My work has taken me across the United States and the world. One position was in South Africa, supporting the launch of HIV treatment nationally. I met a wonderful woman, a housekeeper who wanted to know why I was halfway around the globe, and where my family was. I told her about my work and about my own HIV status. She said she wanted to take the test but was afraid, so we went together. She was positive, so we made a plan for how she would access treatment and take care of herself. 
She came to me again a few months later, when her husband was seriously ill. She had gone home to her village and found him forced by his family to sleep on the dirt floor because he was covered in Kaposi Sarcoma lesions. He was also ridden with cancer. We found him a hospice and he was lovingly cared for until he died a few months later. I still keep in touch with his wife by Whatsapp, and she is taking good care of herself and her children despite many challenges.
Today, through the nonprofit development organization Pact, I am working on a project that aims to reduce HIV transmission among key populations and improve their enrollment and retention in care. LINKAGES, led by FHI 360 and funded through the U.S. Agency for International Development and the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, is operating in 30 countries to help community-based organizations expand their HIV services.
My work takes me all over, and when I travel I always try to meet with support groups for people living with HIV. I recently visited Indonesia, which is where I was living when I found out I was HIV-positive all those years ago.
POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media 
While there, I met with a group of HIV peer leaders that included sex workers, youth, gay men and people who inject drugs. We shared our stories of living with HIV and our strategies for keeping our spirits up and overcoming the never-ending challenges and setbacks that come with this infection. I showed them my fancy, expensive new medicine with its reduced side effects and lower toxicity, and we discussed advocating for more treatment options. We talked about the evidence behind the U=U campaign (undetectable = untransmittable) and its impact on love, sex, dating and HIV criminalization laws.
They wanted to know my secret to living well with HIV for 25 years. I shared that for me, it comes down to having a positive attitude and surrounding myself with love and support.
It took me years to find my voice and be ready to share my experience. As my voice has become stronger, so has my ability to help and support others struggling to accept their diagnosis or continue to move forward when faced with a crisis or setback. I’ve received a lot of help to get to this point. I’ve had mentors, colleagues, guides, friends, activists and peers whom I learn from, share with and listen to, and support in return. They challenge and inspire me with their own bravery and passion.
There is no other community like this, and by surrounding myself with those on the same journey, I not only overcome my fear and isolation but empower myself to do more and be more every day.
As I do every year, on this World AIDS Day, I commit to continuing this work until I no longer can. Hopefully, before that day comes, we’ll have found a cure.
Brian White is a senior technical advisor in community strengthening and HIV/AIDS with Pact. Follow him on Twitter: @bpwhite2.
 To respond to a column, submit a comment to letters@usatoday.com.
CONNECTTWEET 65 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2nkc30a
