Seamstress who aided escapees pleads guilty
CLOSE

 The prison worker that conspired with murderers Richard Matt and David Sweat to escape from a New York prison, smuggled hacksaw blades and other tools inside ground beef, according to the district attorney. USA TODAY

Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story misidentified the judge presiding over Joyce Mitchell's court case.
Joyce Mitchell, the New York state prison seamstress accused of smuggling hacksaw blades in frozen hamburger meat to two killers who later broke out, agreed to a plea deal with prosecutors during a court appearance on Tuesday morning.
The agreement included a prison sentence of up to seven years, a year in local jail to be served concurrently, a $5,000 fine and an order that she must cooperate with authorities. She will also lose her teaching license. The judge, Kevin Ryan, must agree to the deal and is expected to pass sentence in September.
As she sat in court in prison garb, legs and arms shackled just after 10:30 a.m. ET, Mitchell wiped tears from her eyes, quietly waiving her right to a jury trial as the judge read through the terms of her plea deal.
Mitchell, 51, a tailor shop instructor at the Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora, N.Y., was arrested and jailed shortly after the elaborate June 6 escape of Richard Matt and David Sweat. Matt was shot and killed by police on June 26 and Sweat was captured near the Canadian border two days later.
After the hearing, Clinton County District Attorney Andrew Wiley held a press conference in which he said the agreement was "in the interests of justice." He said other charges considered included conspiracy to murder her husband and another relating to having sex with Matt and Sweat, but that he had made the decision not to pursue them. He emphasized that further charges could only be avoided if she cooperated fully with authorities.
Mitchell was accused of providing the hacksaw blades as wells as chisels, a punch tool and a screwdriver to Matt. Authorities say she became close to the pair, agreed to be their getaway driver and even discussed killing her husband. But she backed out at the last moment, forcing Matt and Sweat to flee on foot after they emerged from a manhole near the maximum-security prison.
Before the plea deal, Mitchell was arraigned on charges of first-degree promoting prison contraband and fourth-degree criminal facilitating. Mitchell pleaded not guilty after her arrest. She was suspended without pay from her job when she was arrested June 12.
Authorities say Matt and Sweat cut through their adjoining cell walls over months, climbed down catwalks to tunnels, broke through a brick wall, cut into and out of a steam pipe, and cut a chain holding a manhole cover outside the prison to get away.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1HYPGOt
