Oregon Indian tribe calls for end to standoff
Corrections & Clarifications: A previous version of this story included quotes from a Twitter account under Ammon Bundy’s name. Posts now say the account was a parody.
The leader of an Oregon Indian tribe said Wednesday that the armed protesters occupying an Oregon wildlife refuge should go home.
“The protesters have no right to this land," Charlotte Rodrique told the Associated Press. "It belongs to the native people who live here."
Rodrique, tribal chair for the Burns Paiute, said the tribe used land in what is now the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge. She accused the occupiers of "desecrating" sacred sites.
Occupation leader Ammon Bundy and his group, Citizens for Constitutional Freedom, took over the refuge Saturday. The conflict started as a peaceful protest in support of two local ranchers sent to prison for setting fires on federal land. Bundy, a Nevada rancher, and more than a dozen supporters say they won't leave until Dwight and Steven Hammond are freed from federal prison.
Bundy also wants federally owned land in Harney County returned to the people who live there, saying his group was sifting through property records to find instances of federal officials seizing land from private owners.
LaVoy Finicum, spokesman for Bundy's group, told CNN on Wednesday that he did not know the occupation was going to take place when he arrived in the area Saturday for a protest in support of the Hammonds.
Finicum said he, Bundy and others met before that protest and decided they needed to do something more. Now Finicum says he is ready to stay for as long as it takes for their demands to be met. Bundy has said he is ready to stay for years if necessary.
Law enforcement presence in the area around the refuge has not been heavy, and media and local residents have had unfettered access to Bundy at daily news briefings. Gov. Kate Brown issued a statement Tuesday saying state police presence in the area was being "enhanced."
"Although the FBI is the lead agency responding to the situation, my top priority is the safety of the people of Harney County and the city of Burns," she said. "The Oregon State Police has enhanced its presence in the area, augmenting local and federal public safety resources and assisting with community outreach. I look for a swift resolution that allows Harney County life to return to normal."
Finicum told NBC News he would rather die than go prison.
"I have no intention of spending my life in a concrete box," he said. "There are things more important than your life and freedom is one of them."

 Protesters show their support at the Malheur Wildlife Refuge headquarters near Burns, Ore. The last four occupiers of a national wildlife refuge in eastern Oregon surrendered Feb. 11, 2016. The holdouts were the last remnants of a larger group that seized the wildlife refuge nearly six weeks ago, demanding that the government turn over the land to locals and release two ranchers imprisoned for setting fires. Rob Kerr, AFP/Getty Images
