CNN Profiles - Ryan Young - CNN's National Correspondent - CNN
Evidence collected at gunman's Illinois home
Authorities are combing through evidence to determine exactly how James Hodgkinson planned the attack on a Congressional baseball practice. CNN's Ryan Young reports.

Kansas shooting survivor describes ordeal 
The survivor of a potential hate crime-related shooting in Olathe, Kansas, recalls the deadly night. CNN's Ryan Young reports.

Shooting survivor: Man came back with gun
Alok Madasani recounts the shooting that left him injured and killed his friend. CNN's Ryan Young reports.

Cops: Man killed teen, went home, ate dinner
Police say a 62-year-old man in West Virginia shot and killed a black teen after a verbal confrontation on the street. 

Hundreds of thousands storm Cubs parade gate
Hundreds of thousands of fans storm through gates to attend the Chicago Cubs victory parade. 

Cubs win World Series
CNN's Ryan Young was reporting on the World Series Game 7 when the Chicago Cubs won and fans erupted into applause and celebration.

Plane catches on fire, shuts down O'Hare runway
CNN's Ryan Young discusses the details of a plane at Chicago O'Hare International Airport that caught fire and subsequently shut down the runway. 

Cubs reach first World Series in 71 years
The Chicago Cubs finally ended their 71-year absence from the World Series by pushing aside the Los Angeles Dodgers 5-0 in Game 6 of the National League Championship Series.

Attack on Kansas Somali community thwarted
Three men have been arrested in connection with an alleged plot to bomb an apartment complex occupied by Somali immigrants, according to the US Department of Justice. CNN's Ryan Young reports.

What does video of deadly encounter with police show?
The family of Keith Lamont Scott released a video showing the scene before during and after a deadly encounter with police. CNN's Ryan Young reports.

Attorney: Scott family wants protests 'in the right way'
Charlotte braces for protests after riots in the wake of the shooting death of Keith Lamont Scott. CNN's Ryan Young reports.

State of emergency: Charlotte violence erupts
The city of Charlotte, North Carolina is on edge after a second night of chaos erupted in response to the fatal shooting of Keith Lamont Scott by a police officer. CNN's Ryan Young reports. 

(2015) Dashcam video of Sandra Bland's arrest released
The Texas Department of Public Safety has released dashboard camera footage showing Sandra Bland's July 10th arrest in Waller County, Texas. CNN's Ryan Young reports.

Chicago police head opens up on city's violent year
CNN's Ryan Young goes on patrol with Chicago Police Superintendent Eddie Johnson, who was born and raised in the city that is now facing a spike in violent crime. 

Milwaukee protests break out after police shooting
Angry crowds took to the streets in Milwaukee on Saturday night to protest the fatal shooting of an armed man by a police officer. CNN's Ryan Young reports. 
Emmy Award winning Ryan Young is CNN's National Correspondent. Young joined CNN in 2015 and is based at the network's Chicago bureau.
Before joining CNN, Young was part of Atlanta's Channel 2 Action News team. During his time in Atlanta Ryan worked closely with Law Enforcement breaking several exclusives on major crime investigations and his work was directly involved in helping to catch hundreds of criminals. 
His live coverage of major breaking stories lead to several Emmy awards including one for his piece on the chemical fire near Atlanta, GA. 
The Miami native got his first big TV break while still in college by hosting a syndicated sports show. After graduating from Florida State University with a bachelor's degree in Media Production, Young went right to work at WTXL-TV in Tallahassee, Fla., where he kept local viewers in touch with a wide variety of big stories, including the 2002 Florida elections and Florida State's National Championship run.
As a reporter for WTOC-TV in Savannah, Ryan provided viewers with crucial, up-to-the-minute late-night reports, earning two Associated Press awards, one for best investigative piece that exposed dangerous cigarette lighters and the other for best spot news coverage of a major street collapse. 
Ryan went on to tell the stories of people whose lives were torn apart by hurricanes Ivan and Frances, while working for WNCN-TV in Raleigh, N.C. While covering the problem of gangs in the state, Ryan produced a groundbreaking report on gangs in the military, a story that earned him national recognition. 
When not in front of the camera, Ryan enjoys reading, anything that has to do with football and playing a game of fetch with his dog.
