Tom DeLay: In debt contest, America loses
CONNECTTWEET 2 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
The deal underway in Congress to raise the debt ceiling is bad for America and not what the citizens of this country have made clear that they want. The people desire less spending, and this compromise does not deliver cuts.
According to an Oct. 10 Rasmussen Reports survey, 53% of likely voters want "major spending cuts as part of a debt-ceiling deal." A Sept. 24 Rasmussen poll shows that 64% of Americans think spending cuts are best for the economy as opposed to the government doing more to try to "stimulate" it.
So where are the cuts? There are none, and in fact the finger has been pulled from the dyke to allow the flood of federal red ink to keep flowing. Today's agreement opens the door to the Democrats' goal of an additional $1 trillion in debt on top of the existing $16.8 trillion. And with no agreement on curtailing entitlement spending or holding off on Obamacare, the debt will only continue to grow.
Predictably, most news media accounts have portrayed this whole budget showdown as a lose-lose proposition for Republicans. That's an oversimplification of a problem that has left Democrats tarnished as well. As shown in numerous polls over the past couple of weeks, a majority believes that President Obama has put politics over the country in the budget negotiations, and more than 60% disapprove of the way Democrats in Congress have handled the impasse. In short, no one comes out of this mess clean.
It's hard not to feel the pain of the GOP leadership, which faced a ticking clock and a president who outrageously refused to negotiate. Republicans kept going back to the bargaining table while Obama headed to the golf course. A government can't function responsibly when only one side is dealing.
The practical consequences of this week's arrangement are straightforward. The only possible good result is that reportedly, the sequester's spending cuts are still intact, but it's safer to wait until reading the small print. On the negative side of the ledger, by conceding, the House gives up its power of the purse. Passing up on the power to say no on spending only encourages more in the future.
With the Senate and White House in the Democrats' hands, the options were limited for conservatives pushing to limit the growth of government and delay implementation of Obamacare. But, eventually, a real line has to be drawn in the sand to force Washington to live within its means, and there is no better issue than on simply delaying costly Obamacare implementation for a year. That will necessitate better articulating what's at stake and why a government shutdown isn't as bad as accumulating trillions in additional debt.
The problem with the Republicans' bend-but-don't-break defense is that it usually bends too much, allowing the other side to score. To win in the blood sport of politics, you have to go on offense. Conservatives need to start getting a game plan together for the next big contest.
Tom DeLay is a Texas Republican and the former majority leader of the U.S. House of Representatives. Brett M. Decker, consulting director of the White House Writers Group, was the speechwriter in Mr. DeLay's leadership office. 
 To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

CONNECTTWEET 2 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1aP1AIG
