Ted Cruz's dad walks fine line in son's campaign
Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this story misidentified the ministry that Rafael Cruz was associated with. It was called “Purifying Fire Ministries” but has since ceased to exist.
HOUSTON — Sen. Ted Cruz has more than Tea Party activists and big-dollar donors boosting his presidential campaign.
He has dad.
Rafael Cruz, a 76-year-old Cuban immigrant and outspoken pastor, has been relentlessly stumping for son Ted, filling auditoriums from San Antonio to Iowa City with enthusiastic crowds and becoming one of the top surrogates for the Cruz campaign. The father’s story of fleeing a communist country for the riches of America is striking a chord with social conservatives who make up the base of GOP primary voters.
The elder Cruz has also drawn his share of controversy and criticism, such as when he told a gathering of Texas Tea Partiers in 2012 that he would like to send President Obama “back to Kenya” or compared the U.S. president to Cuban dictator Fidel Castro, that could hurt his son’s campaign in the long run.
The Cruz campaign did not return a request for comment for this story.
For now, Rafael Cruz's rhetoric is being eagerly consumed by GOP audiences.
“Every candidate wishes they had a dad like Rafael doing what Rafael’s doing,” said Bob Vander Plaats, president of the Family Leader group and a political power broker in Iowa. “It always speaks well when your family is supportive of you.”
Candidates have enlisted their fathers in the past, and two current GOP candidates — Jeb Bush and Rand Paul — have well-known dads (former president George H.W. Bush and former congressman and presidential candidate Ron Paul, respectively).

But unlike those candidates, who have distanced themselves from their family names in this election, Ted Cruz is aligning himself with his dad’s cautionary tale of how his home country lost freedoms under a communist regime, said Mark Jones, a political scientist at Rice University in Houston.
That message, mixed with Rafael Cruz’s religious fervor, makes him an ideal surrogate among both Tea Party activists and traditional social conservatives — core GOP primary voters, he said.
“He has a great ability in these relatively small settings to connect with the audience in a way that many spouses and other relatives do not,” Jones said.
In 2013 and 2014, Vander Plaats invited Rafael Cruz to speak at his group’s annual leadership summit. Both times, Cruz was the top-rated speaker in attendance among the two dozen who spoke at each event, he said. This summer, he spoke at a gathering of influential Iowan pastors and wowed them, as well, Vander Plaats said.
“Rafael just knocked it out the park,” he said. “He has such a compelling American story to tell, combined with his passion. It resonates.”

Rafael Cruz was imprisoned and beaten as a teen by the regime of former Cuban president Fulgencio Batista and fled to the United States, winding up in Austin, Texas, according to Ted Cruz: A Time for Truth, the senator’s autobiography. He initially backed Castro’s rebel army but later became disillusioned when the new Cuban leader turned to communism, according to the book.
He learned English, attended college and became a mathematician. But he also hit a rough patch, “lived a fast life” and abandoned his wife and young son in Canada, Ted Cruz writes in the book. He had a turning point when he attended a Bible study at a friend’s house in Houston in 1975, and “surrendered his life to Jesus,” the book said.
He retrieved his wife and son and began a new, pious life in Houston, according to the book.

Present at that pivotal Bible study was Bob Abrahams, a deacon at Clay Road Baptist Church, which the Cruzes attended. Abrahams, now 90, said he and Rafael Cruz would pray together in Abrahams' office at least once a week and the elder Cruz was always present around the church.
“It’s real,” he said of Rafael Cruz’s spiritual devotion. “He’s a man of prayer.”
Robert Stovall, chairman of the Republican Party of Bexar County, Texas, recruited Rafael Cruz to speak last year at an annual BBQ in San Antonio. The fundraising event usually draws between 250 and 350 people, he said. Around 600 people came out to see the senator’s dad — the highest number ever for the event.
“He’s reinforcing the same message that Sen. Cruz is getting out there, which is: The battles he’s picking are worth standing up for,” Stovall said. “If you don’t pick those battles, eventually, you’re going to get something you don’t want.”

But the senior Cruz also teeters on the edge of controversy that would spook most presidential candidates. In March, Buzzfeed ran a feature titled “The 68 Most Controversial Things Ted Cruz’s Dad Ever Said,” including assertions that death panels are part of Obamacare and urging parents to pull their children from U.S. public schools because they’re "brainwashing" students “no different than what has happened in the Marxist countries.”
That type of rhetoric plays well with hard-line GOP primary voters but could alienate a lot of potential voters were his son to win the party’s nomination, Jones said.
“In a general election, Rafael goes from a certain asset to a potential liability,” he said.
Follow @MrRJervis on Twitter.

 Cruz meets with local business, civic and educational leaders during a luncheon meeting on May 20, 2017, at the Barn Door Restaurant in Odessa, Texas. Mark Sterkel, Odessa American/AP
