Green Statement
2015 USA TODAY
 Green Statement
Environmental and Sustainability Initiatives
We are committed to making smart decisions to protect the environment and manage our environmental impact responsibly. We have taken a number of steps to reduce our environmental impact and underscore our commitment to sustainability.
We have been an industry pioneer in switching to environmentally-friendly press products, such as low-VOC (Volatile Organic Compound) washes and fountain solutions and citrusbased press cleaners. All colored inks we use are soy-based rather than petroleum-based, and delivered in reusable containers. Our waste ink is recycled, either on-site or at the manufacturer’s facility. We continue to minimize landfill usage by collecting used paper, plastics and other materials for recycling and we have substantially reduced water usage by switching to dry methods of photo processing and plate processing.
We have reduced greenhouse emissions by using newsprint vendors who practice sustainability, by switching to light-weight newsprint, and reducing the size of the newspapers printed.
We are focused on energy efficiency. We have relocated many employees in other facilities to newer, more energy efficient offices. We have also installed more energy efficient systems and appliances in many of our buildings. Since 2012, our energy reduction program has reduced estimated energy usage by almost 12 million kilowatt hours annually. For 2015, we have identified new projects to reduce power consumption even further.
Our Green Operating Employee Group serves as a forum to review and recommend “green” ideas and practices. The group maintains an intranet site that provides an accessible, informative and interactive resource, highlighting new and innovative green best practices which help our businesses and properties develop more sustainable operating practices.
Many of our media organizations cover environmental and sustainability issues. A good example is The Des Moines Register, which — in a journalistic first — used a combination of traditional print coverage and emerging digital technologies, including virtual reality, to tell a powerful story about how Iowa farm families are responding to climate change as well as cultural, economic and technological changes. Localized versions of the series were published in Gannett’s other properties, including 80 local newspapers, 46 television station websites and USA TODAY.
Make A Difference Day is the nation’s largest day of volunteering. For more than 20 years, the group has mobilized millions of people across the U.S. for this national day of service. Together with its hundreds of carrier newspapers and longstanding partners, USA TODAY rallies millions of people to help improve their communities. Volunteer efforts often include environmentally beneficial projects such as planting trees or gardens, cleaning up trash and planting sod.
The Gannett Foundation supports non-profit activities in communities where we do business and contributes to a variety of charitable causes through its Community Grant Program. One of Gannett Foundation’s community action grant priorities is environmental conservation.
