Voices: At Burning Man, pretty much anything goes
BURNING MAN 2015 Leaving Burning Man behind | 0:51
A week with some of the world's most interesting people will leave an indelible mark long afterward. USA TODAY reporter Trevor Hughes shares his final thoughts on the Burning Man festival in the Black Rock Desert in Nevada. Trevor Hughes
1 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man: Temple Burn | 0:36
A large crowd watched the near-silent ceremonial burning of a temple Sunday night in the Black Rock Desert. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
2 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man: Exodus Underway | 0:34
The exodus from Burning Man is underway as nearly 70,000 people fly, drive, bike and hitchhike out of the Nevada desert following a fiery weeklong pilgrimage. Trevor Hughes
3 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man's 60-foot 'Man' burns | 0:38
Tens of thousands watch as Burning Man's effigy burns to the ground. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
4 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Anything goes for Burning Man costumes | 0:54
Burning Man attendees wear every kind of costume -- and some forgo clothes entirely Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
5 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man: Thursday Dust Devil | 0:13
Burning Man: Burners encountered a dust devil on the playa Thursday afternoon in the Nevada desert. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
6 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man: Burners in the desert encounter whiteout conditions | 0:44
Burning Man: Burners in the Black Rock Desert encounter whiteout conditions as high winds kicked up dust on the playa. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
7 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man: Wednesday Dust Advisory | 0:59
Burning Man: Wednesday Dust Advisory. High winds kick up blinding dust at the desert festival. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
8 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man: A feast for the eyes | 1:24
Anything goes at desert festival where anything can happen- and usually does. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
9 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Dusty Burning Man is under way | 0:37
Thousands of participants are pouring into the Nevada desert for the weeklong festival, arriving in car, by plane and every other way possible. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
10 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man is incredibly dusty and windy | 0:43
As crews set-up for this years Burning Man, the toughest part is battling the elements. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
11 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 Burning Man devotees swamp big box stores for supplies | 1:06
In Reno, overloaded SUVs are filling the streets, a sure sign that the annual pilgrimage to Burning Man is underway. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
12 of 13

BURNING MAN 2015 See craziest Burning Man costumes to inspire you for the festival | 1:03
Let the fashion and fun ignite! If you're heading to Burning Man and looking for an eccentric costume, let Instagram inspire you. Krystin Goodwin (@Krystingoodwin) highlights a few of the best ensembles posted to social media. Buzz60
13 of 13
 Leaving Burning Man behind 

 Burning Man: Temple Burn 

 Burning Man: Exodus Underway 

 Burning Man's 60-foot 'Man' burns 

 Anything goes for Burning Man costumes 

 Burning Man: Thursday Dust Devil 

 Burning Man: Burners in the desert encounter whiteout conditions 

 Burning Man: Wednesday Dust Advisory 

 Burning Man: A feast for the eyes 

 Dusty Burning Man is under way 

 Burning Man is incredibly dusty and windy 

 Burning Man devotees swamp big box stores for supplies 

 See craziest Burning Man costumes to inspire you for the festival 

Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this story overstated the relative size of Black Rock City. It would be among the ten biggest cities in Nevada. 
BLACK ROCK CITY, Nev. — A young woman stepped into the dusty glare of my headlights, and I realized she was topless. And pantsless.
The only things she wore:. A playing card strapped around her waist with a clear rubber band — and a giant smile.
"Welcome home!" she said. "Is this your first time?"
Yes. Yes, it is.
I'm spending the week embedded in the annual Burning Man festival, reporting on the newest tech trends, the dust storms and the luxury camps that drew criticism last year. The temporary city we've created is called Black Rock City, and this week it will be one of the largest "cities" in Nevada.
Newcomers like me are pulled from their vehicles to celebrate. In my case, the young woman ordered me to take off my shirt and make dust angels as lights flashed and music drifted on the wind. I banged a bell as my greeters yelled, "Not a virgin," to mark my transition into the encampment.
Burning Man draws approximately 70,000 people annually to the Nevada desert for the almost-anything-goes event. A sign at the entrance warns arrivals that all laws apply, but there's a lot of people and not a lot of cops.
That's kind of the point: Organizers create and encourage a freewheeling experience in which many take illegal drugs, and casual sex is not only common, but widely condoned. Many of the themed camps — the festival encourages people to create "interactive" sites open to all — seem intended to confront and then contort societal norms. But norms are reserved for the outside world, the Default World.
Here, creativity is everywhere. Elaborate sculptures reach toward the sky. Others blast flames. Endless electronic dance music pumps out as neon-lit vehicles circle. Strangers hug you without warning.

And the outfits. The outfits! This is a place for extreme personal expression in a way that might make many Americans feel uncomfortable. Here, lots of people go shirtless, and there's a decent amount wearing even less than my greeter.
Media access is tightly controlled, and the organizers use copyright law to enforce the rules. Photographers, for instance, must sign a contract agreeing not to exploit people's images for personal gain. The last thing Burning Man organizers want is to see participants' images used to sell stuff.
And while it took me a whole day to notice, now I can't stop marveling at the complete lack of stuff being sold or marketed. Corporate logos on rental trucks are usually covered up or altered, and there's no one hawking, well, anything.
It's a welcome relief from the constant pressure of consumerism we face every day. Gone are the messages to buy buy buy. Instead, we're asked to simply be. (There's no official Internet provider, and mobile phone coverage is iffy.)
Don't get me wrong. Virtually everyone has spent a lot of money to be here, and spending a week requires lots of logistics. I watched as participants stocked up on cheap plastic junk in Reno, pouring millions of dollars into that city's economy while allowing Burning Man to maintain its reputation as the world's largest Leave No Trace event.
Here, the entire economy is based on the concept of gifting. People give you things out of the kindness of their hearts, with "gifts" ranging from sculptures to free booze to Tantric massages.
Sunday, a young woman handed me a beaded bracelet she'd made, with each colored bead a piece of Morse code.
Unfurled, if you know how to read it, the bracelet quotes Shakespeare: "All the world's a stage, and all the men and women merely players."
For the next week, this remote Nevada desert is the biggest stage of all.

 From its humble beginnings on a California beach, Burning Man has grown into a weeklong event in which participants create a temporary city in the Nevada desert. While most people camp in tents, a small number stay in luxury camps like this one, with air conditioning, flush toilets and professionally prepared meals, while sleeping in behemoth RVs and assisted by paid staff. Trevor Hughes, USA TODAY
