How to avoid some of the more common IRA mistakes
CLOSE

 It's an perennial question in personal finance when it comes to retirement planning: should youcontribute to a Roth IRA or a traditional IRA? Newslook

Nearly four in 10 households in the U.S. own an individual retirement arrangement or IRA. And that means about 50 million households might someday make a costly and perhaps irrevocable mistake when it comes time to take required minimum distributions or RMDs from those accounts.
According to Uncle Sam, you generally must start taking withdrawals — RMDs — from your IRA, SEP IRA, SIMPLE IRA, or retirement plan account when you reach age 70½. Your RMD is the minimum amount you must withdraw from your account each year. And according to the IRS, the beginning date for your first RMD for IRAs, including SEP and SIMPLE IRAs, is April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70½ and for 401(k), profit-sharing, 403(b), or other defined contribution plans it’s generally, April 1 following the later of the calendar year in which you: reach age 70½, or retire.
Sounds simple, but retirement account owners make plenty of mistakes when it comes to RMDs. Here’s a look at some of the common mistakes that are made: 
You need to take your RMD. “The most common mistake is either someone not taking RMDs from their qualified accounts or not enough,” says Thomas O’Connell, president of International Financial Advisory Group.
And claiming ignorance when you forget to take a distribution is no excuse. “Thinking and believing that ‘no one told me about the rules’ is a valid excuse for missing or messing up the amount you take for your RMD,” says Matthew Curfman, the president and co-owner of Richmond Brothers. “The onus is on the taxpayer and just because you have not been audited ‘yet’ does not mean you are in the clear.”
Curfman says the taxpayer/IRA owner is still responsible for correcting any mistakes that are uncovered. To be fair, there is a chance that if you take immediate corrective action, that the IRS could waive your penalty. “But if you do nothing and the IRS discovers your mistake, you should be prepared to pay Uncle Sam a hefty penalty,” he says.
Are you still working past age 70? More people are working until or past age 70, says Joseph Clark, a managing partner with The Financial Enhancement Group. “They seem to forget the technical rule is you must take an RMD the year after the year you turn 70½,” he says. “But if you wait you must take two distributions the following year and the first prior to April 1. This is important when people have large payouts their final year of work.”

Own a 401(k) and still working? Many account owners don’t know if they can delay taking their RMD if they own a 401(k) and are still working. “Assuming you are not a material owner — that is you own less than 5% of a business sponsoring the plan — you don’t have to take an RMD from a 401(k) while working,” Clark says. “You do, however, have to take the RMD from IRAs regardless of working or not when you reach the 70½ mark or the year after.
Aggregate accounts where possible. Aggregate and consolidate your IRA accounts and your 403(b) accounts, when possible. This sort of aggregation, says Clark, is confusing to professionals especially in the academic world where they have 403(b) accounts and IRAs at the same custodian.
According to the IRS: “An IRA owner must calculate the RMD separately for each IRA that he or she owns, but can withdraw the total amount from one or more of the IRAs. Similarly, a 403(b) contract owner must calculate the RMD separately for each 403(b) contract that he or she owns, but can take the total amount from one or more of the 403(b) contracts.”
However, the IRS notes, RMDs required from other types of retirement plans, such as 401(k) and 457(b) plans have to be taken separately from each of those plan accounts. “So, if you have five 401(k) accounts you have five separate distributions,” Clark says.
Clark’s advice: Consolidate your IRA accounts and your 403(b) accounts.
Of note, the consequence of not taking the correct RMD from the right accounts is severe. “The penalty for a missed RMD or less than full RMD is a 50% penalty plus interest on what was not taken,” says O’Connell.
More: 
IRA at a bank or credit union? Many retirement account owners established IRAs at their bank and/or credit union and now think of them as savings accounts, not retirement accounts. “Many times, IRA owners have small and sometimes large IRA balances at their bank and/or credit union and when it comes to RMDs they only look at their brokerage statements to add up the value of their IRAs,” Curfman says.
Beware the one rollover per 12-month rule. If a distribution from an IRA or a retirement plan is paid directly to you, you can deposit all or a portion of it in an IRA or a retirement plan within 60 days, according to the IRS. But you can do only one of these rollovers in a 12-month period, says Bill Harris, a certified financial planner and co-founder of WH Cornerstone Investments. “It is no longer one per account and it is not one IRA and one Roth IRA rollover,” he says. “It is only one 60-day rollover every 12 months. We anticipate we will see lots of mistakes in this area.”
When in doubt. If you own an IRA, or inherit an IRA, or receive an IRA as part of a divorce settlement and you’re not sure whether and when to take a distribution, get some professional help. One resource is www.irahelp.com. Check out the IRS website too. 
Robert Powell is editor of Retirement Weekly, contributes regularly to USA TODAY, The Wall Street Journal, TheStreet and MarketWatch. Got questions about money? Email Bob at rpowell@allthingsretirement.com.
Can the penalty for not taking the full RMD be waived?
Yes, according to the IRS. The penalty may be waived if the account owner establishes that the shortfall in distributions was due to reasonable error and that reasonable steps are being taken to remedy the shortfall. In order to qualify for this relief, you must file Form 5329 and attach a letter of explanation. See the IRS instructions to Form 5329.
Robert Powell is editor of Retirement Weekly, contributes regularly to MarketWatch, The Wall Street Journal, USA TODAY, and teaches at Boston University. Got questions about money? Email rpowell@allthingsretirement.com.
CLOSE

 Keep track of your Roth IRA contributions, said Ed Slott, founder of Ed Slott & Company. And remember there is no age limit to add to your account, but there is an income limit. Video provided by TheStreet Newslook

CONNECTTWEET 59 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2yxek8I
