How Manny Pacquiao beat Jessie Vargas round by round
LAS VEGAS — Manny Pacquiao, now a senator in the Philippines, made a triumphant return to boxing Saturday, outclassing WBO welterweight champion Jessie Vargas in a 12-round title bout at the Thomas & Mack Center on the campus of UNLV.
Pacquiao (59-6-2, 38 KOs) won by scores of 114-113 and 118-109 twice, retaking a belt he used to own. USA TODAY Sports scored it 117-110 for Pacquiao.
The 27-year old Vargas (27-2, 10 KOs), a decade younger than his opponent, won the vacant WBO title in April when he knocked out Sadam Ali in Washington.
With Floyd Mayweather sitting at Ringside, Pacquiao put on the type of show he was unable to put on against Mayweather in 2015. A raucous pro Pacquiao crowd of 16,132 at The Thomas and Mack Center chanted "Man-ny, Man-ny" almost every round.
Here is how the rounds unfolded:
FIRST ROUND
Boxers are fighting in the center of the ring, Pacquiao decked out in black trunks with gold trim, Vargas wearing red with gold trim. Crowd chanting for Manny. A lot of feinting by both fighters but few punches thrown. Vargas jabbing with that stiff jab that Timothy Bradley talked about. Swings and misses by both fighters. A right by Vargas followed by more jabbing. Manny ties up Vargas. There was more action in the last 10 seconds than most of the rest of the round. Vargas is more active and I give him the round.
SECOND ROUND
Pacquiao using his still spectacular footwork, but Vargas presses the action. Both fighters remain cautious. Pacquiao misses with a left. So much for early action. Vargas misses with a right, and Pac counters with a left. A sudden, straight left hand by Pacquiao drops Vargas. Wow, a lightning quick punch that lands right on the button. A 10-8 round for Pacquiao.
THIRD ROUND
Vargas presses the action but Pac returns a flurry. The action is staying in the center of the ring for the most part. Pac attacks again, and his expression makes it look like he has this under control. Crowd chanting Man-ny! Man-ny! Vargas not getting much of Pac. Wild swing and his glove touches the canvas. They tie each other up as the bell ring. Another round for Pacquiao, who's up 2-1 on my card.
FOURTH ROUND
Vargas struggling to get his hands on Pacquiao, whose quickness seems to be back, if it ever left, and is making Vargas miss. Left by Pac connects, and Vargas misses with a right, then holds Pac’s neck. Vargas tags Pacquiao on the chin with a stiff jab. He needs to use the jab more. Manny's left is returned by a Vargas right. Another tie-up. Short left by Pac is followed by a right by Vargas as the bell ends round 4. Very close round but have to give it to Vargas. Tied 2-2.
FIFTH ROUND
Several swings and misses. Hard left by Pac connects to Vargas' midsection. Vargas’ right eye might be starting to close. Vargas goes back to the jab. Vargas comes in with a right hand then they clinch in the corner. Vargas misses with a right, and Manny returns a left that connects. Vargas ends the round with three or four lunges and misses. Good Pacquiao round and he's up 3-2

SIXTH ROUND
More caution to start the round, as Vargas uses the jab to keep Pac away. Left by Pac misses and Vargas ties him up. Then Vargas connects with a hard right, which he's been trying land all night. Vicious exchange right in front of us that Vargas might have gotten the better of. Pacquiao lunges with a left that barely misses as the bell rings. Good round for Vargas. 3-3.
SEVENTH ROUND
Pacquiao is using the right hand early in the seventh, to which Vargas didn't seem to have an answer. Ultimately it might have won him the round because Vargas seemed unable to counter. Vargas comes forward and throws a hard right that glances off. Pac is jabbing to keep Vargas away. A wild Vargas right goes over the ducking Pac’s head. I give the round to Pacquiao and the lead 4-3.
EIGHTH ROUND
Pacquiao throws some wicked combinations that all connect as Vargas is cut, and Pacquiao smells the blood. Vargas now bleeding heavily over his right eye. Straight right by Pac connects and snaps Vargas’ head back. Pac dominates the round and leads 5-3.
NINTH ROUND
Pac throwing hard lefts early as Vargas looks tired. Pac is relentless, comes in with a straight left, followed by another left. Vargas right hand misses as Pac ducks. Pac blocks a right hand shot. Pac’s superior footwork is paying off, as Vargas throws and catches a lot of air with his last two rights. Another good round for Pacquiao and a 6-3 lead.
TENTH ROUND
Hard lefts by Pac connect as Vargas seemingly has no answers. The fighting senator looks in great shape. Left and right, then another left by Pac leaves Vargas gasping for air. Vargas finally connects with a right hand but it seems to be a case of too little, too late. Pac stalks Vargas onthe ropes, and looks mighty confident with two rounds to go. Pacquiao wins the round, leads 7-3.
ELEVENTH ROUND
Pac charges and throws two hard lefts. Vargas comes back and connects with a right to the forehead of Pacquiao. Vargas hanging tough, but probably needs a knockout to win this. Pacquiao making it look easy. Hard right by Vargas glances off Pacquiao, then Pac comes back with a right that appears to knock Vargas down, his glove touches the canvas, but referee Kenny Bayless rules it a slip. He’s a great ref, but I believe is wrong on that count. Pacquiao's round; we go to the 12th.
TWELFTH ROUND
Pacquiao nails Vargas with a left on the chin; Vargas is game, but about to lose his belt. Combination by Vargas lands, but Pacquiao is being cautious. Does not want to get hit with a big punch. Vargas is trying though. Swings and misses by Vargas, and Manny counters with a left. Vargas touches the canvas and Bayless rules it a slip again. It’s over. Should be an easy Pacquiao victory. He outclassed Vargas, who was unable to connect enough with the overhand right he hoped would catch Pacquiao.
PHOTOS: Manny Pacquiao through the years

 Manny Pacquiao (R) of the Philippines fight Jeff Horn (L) of Australia during the World Boxing Organization boat at Suncorp Stadium in Brisbane on July 2, 2017. PATRICK HAMILTON, AFP/Getty Images
