OnPolitics Today: Trump drops plan to give DREAMers citizenship
8.3k Shares 





We have an immigration plan from the White House, and it includes a road to citizenship for DREAMers.
The proposal unveiled Thursday in a briefing would offer legal status to as many as 1.8 million people brought to U.S. illegally as children. It would also require a whopping $25 billion for a border wall.
The details came during a White House briefing for allies of the president and congressional staffers, to which USA TODAY had access. 
Also included: A massive cut in family-based immigration and the death of a diversity visa lottery system that brings in immigrants from under-represented countries, as David Jackson, Gregory Korte, Eliza Collins and Alan Gomez report in a piece you should read in full.
Also on Thursday: Trump does Davos, and the latest on his date with Robert Mueller.
Trump and Mueller: What to expect, when it happens
President Trump said he's ready to testify under oath for investigator Robert Mueller's Russia probe into his campaign's connections with Russia. But just how that interview will unfold remains to be seen. White House attorney Ty Cobb said Trump will "be guided by the advice of his personal counsel,” and that negotiations for the interview remain ongoing. Look for Mueller to ask Trump about collusion between his campaign and Russia (which Trump denies) and about his firing of one-time adviser Michael Flynn, who pleaded guilty to lying about his contacts with Russia. Also on the table: obstruction of justice. See our full preview here.
Trump in Davos: U.K., Palestine and no Melania
Trump arrived in Davos, Switzerland, to sell other nations on policies that put "America First" during the World Economic Forum. His goal, in his own words, is "to tell the world how great America is and is doing." Safe to say that mission will be accomplished. On Thursday, he hinted he has a "proposal" for Middle East peace but won't reveal it until Palestinians show "respect' for his choice to recognize Jerusalem as Israel's capital. While meeting with British Prime Minister Theresa May, he framed the series of rifts between himself and his British counterpart as a "false rumor." And Melania? She skipped the trip last minute, and visited the Holocaust museum alone.
