My Hispanic son: Why is Apple so white at the top?
Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this column misstated the percentage points that Blacks, Hispanics and Native Americans are under-represented in the tech industry compared to the U.S. labor force.
When Apple and over 90 tech companies filed an amicus brie
f
 in opposition to President Donald Trump’s immigration moratorium, I was dumbfounded to see an industry wade into a political debate in the name of protecting diversity in our country, when that same industry has done so little to foster diversity and inclusion in its own ranks among senior management and boards.
It’s a problem that’s been on my mind ever since my teenage son asked me why Apple’s board was almost entirely white. It was one of those unintentionally rhetorical questions that only a child could ask; one which I did not have an answer for.
I knew my son deserved a valid answer, so in 2015 I submitted the first-ever shareholder proposal
 that called upon the tech giant to address its lack of racial diversity, especially among its senior management and board. I’ve been working this year with the non-profit organization Open MIC
 to focus investor attention on the upcoming vote at Apple’s annual meeting on February 28.
The unfortunate fact is that only 7% of Apple’s leadership is Hispanic and 3% black. Only five out of Apple’s top 107 executives are black, Hispanic, Native American or Hawaiian/Pacific Islander. The Company’s eight-member board includes one black man and two women (one of whom is Asian).
CLOSE

 Apple is among several tech companies expected to sign a brief supporting transgender rights in a case scheduled to be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court next month. USA TODAY
In fact, contrary to Apple’s public stance on diversity, only a handful of people of color have ever been promoted to senior management or its board over Apple’s 40 years’ history; with very large gaps in-between such promotions. This raises the larger question of whether Apple has systemic cultural biases that prevents people of color from achieving roles in senior management and board. Biases that not only affects it internally, but financially, and opens the company to a variety of risks, including legal.
More:
My intention, however, is not just to push for change at Apple, which is one of the most iconic and influential companies in our country’s history. It is also to spur a change that would ripple through the tech industry, which now includes five of the top 10 most valuable companies on earth.
Right now, Blacks, Hispanics and Native Americans are underrepresented in tech by 16 to 18 percentage points compared to the U.S. labor force overall. Though, when people like myself raise this with executives, they often point to the lack of people of color in the talent pipeline. We now know that’s not necessarily where the problem lies. Today, African-Americans and Hispanics earn nearly 18% of computer science degrees but hold under 5% of jobs in the tech industry. Further, focusing solely on talent pipeline negates the lack of diversity in the many non-technical roles — legal, public relations, marketing, sales, etc.— that are required to keep any company operating healthily, and from which a variety of senior management and board positions could be filled.

As a father and a Hispanic, these numbers alarm me because they suggest that if my son were to try and enter the tech sector, the deck would be stacked against him. And were he to overcome the huge barriers that prevent people of color from winning senior positions in tech, he’d likely face a new set of obstacles that exist within the industry itself.
The sad reality is that many of the very few people of color who are employed in the tech industry do not feel welcomed, which isn’t exactly surprising: the industry is built, shaped and run by white men. This explains why people of color leave the tech sector at more than three times the rate as white men.
It’s not all bad news though: To the industry’s credit, since my original proposal was submitted in 2015, companies have started to report their diversity numbers more frequently and some like Microsoft and Intel, have publicly announced diversity goals and have started to tie executive bonuses towards meeting them.
In evaluating solutions to the problem, it's important to address one common and dangerous misconception head on: that companies must recruit and hire based on quotas to meet set recruitment targets for traditionally underrepresented groups. This represents tokenism, by which a member of an underrepresented group is given a position primarily to showcase diversity to the world. The corporate culture and environment remains unchanged by this method, allowing for unconscious biases to continue festering within.
To remedy this problem, I submitted a proposal last year that got 5.1% of the vote and have proposed to Apple the following actions in this year’s proposal that could make large improvements to its diversity issues and bottom line:
Linking employee compensation to the achievement of diversity goals, especially for senior company management. 
Establishing a board refreshment policy that incorporates specific language to ensure racial diversity. 
Establishing a board-level committee responsible for diversity outcomes. 
Regularly disclosing a full set of diversity metrics to shed light on existing challenges and to inform goals and activities. 
To date, Apple has not replied.
Apple is a global leader in the tech industry and has a fiduciary responsibility to shareholders to promote diversity in senior management and its board of directors. As an Apple Investor, I fear that Apple will fail to recruit top talent, that it will fail to recognize and embrace innovation, and that it will fail to meet the expectations of billions of customers worldwide.
Those concerns apply throughout the tech industry. Executives at major tech companies like Apple must make diversity a high priority. Addressing this issue must be as embedded in tech culture as much as technology is in our daily lives.
A more diverse tech industry will help to address the growing inequality in our country. Studies suggest it will translate into higher returns for companies and investors. And most importantly, it will leverage the industry’s incredible social and economic influence to center the leadership and expertise of otherwise marginalized communities.
Tony Maldonado is an Apple shareholder and an executive creative director at IGRP, a boutique London and New York-based production music company that operates out of studios globally. His twitter handle is @indigoblueusa.
CONNECTTWEET 20 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2lNQqCC
