Obama: Iran deal 'an important first step'
WASHINGTON — President Obama said Saturday that an interim agreement on Iran's nuclear program is "an important first step" and again vowed to prevent Tehran from obtaining the means to make nuclear weapons.
U.S. and allied diplomacy "opened up a new path toward a world that is more secure." Obama during a seven-minute statement at the White House. "A future in which we can verify that Iran's nuclear program is peaceful and that it cannot build a nuclear weapon."
The president spoke just after U.S. and international partners negotiated a six-month interim deal with Iran, which agreed to limit nuclear activities in return for relief from up to $7 billion in sanctions that have hurt its economy.
Obama pledged to work with Congress moving forward on a permanent agreement with Iran. But the president indicated he would oppose congressional calls for new sanctions in the short term because they would "derail this promising first step" and risk a possible military confrontation over Iran.
"I have a profound responsibility to try to resolve our differences peacefully, rather than rush towards conflict," Obama said.
CLOSE

 President Barack Obama says a nuclear deal with Iran is an "important first step" toward addressing the world's concerns over the Islamic republic's disputed nuclear program. USA TODAY
The sanctions that have been eased can be reapplied, and new ones put in place, if Iran violates the agreement over the next six months, Obama stressed.
"This first step will create time and space over the next six months for more negotiations to fully address our comprehensive concerns about the Iranian program," he said. "And because of this agreement, Iran cannot use negotiations as cover to advance its program."
He added that "the burden is on Iran to prove" that its nuclear program is for peaceful energy purposes.
The president again pledged to block Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, and said that "ultimately only diplomacy can bring about a durable solution."
Israel is likely to oppose the deal. Officials there have long said that Iran cannot be trusted and is determined to make nuclear weapons.
Dave Solimini, a spokesman for Democratic-leaning Truman Project, a Washington-based national security group, said the interim agreement proves that years of sanctions against Iran have worked.
"Iran's sincerity in these negotiations must always be subject to proof, which is why ongoing inspections and surveillance of their facilities is even more important now," he said. "The secondary sanctions which were switched off can just as easily be switched back on if Iran fails to keep their word."
Some congressional Republicans, meanwhile, questioned the value of the interim agreement.
CLOSE

 Secretary of State John Kerry said Sunday that the prospect of a final nuclear deal with Iran is "not a question of trust," but of verification that the Iranians are giving up the prospect of nuclear weapons. VPC
"Unless the agreement requires dismantling of the Iranian centrifuges, we really haven't gained anything," tweeted Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C. Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, said in a tweet that it is "amazing" what the White House "will do to distract:" from the problems surrounding its health care program.
Rep. Ed Royce, R-Cal., chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said Tehran will be able "to keep the key elements of its nuclear weapons-making capability" under the deal.
Said Royce: "I have serious concerns that this agreement does not meet the standards necessary to protect the United States and our allies."
Sen. Mark Kirk, R-Ill., said the agreement "appears to give Iran billions in exchange for cosmetic concessions." Kirk said the Senate must be prepared to impose new sanctions if Iran undermines the deal.
