6 tech gadgets to make your college life easier
In college, tech products can help students stay fit, keep organized and have fun.

Same. (Giphy)
Here are six gadgets that can make your life easier in college.
1. The Fitbit Charge 2 — $129.99
 Rise to the occasion with Fitbit Challenges and Adventure Races in the Fitbit app. Here’s how: https://t.co/ryLQe5jnSQ #MondayMotivation pic.twitter.com/WdGFm3NRZQ
 — Fitbit (@fitbit) June 26, 2017
Staying in shape in college can be hard — especially with that busy schedule. But wearing a Fitbit or other fitness tracker can make working out a little more fun and meaningful.
With a Fitbit, you can challenge your roommates to see who takes the most steps and hold weekly competitions to see who gets around campus most. It’s also good to keep track of your heartbeat and calories you burn when you go to the gym. The Fitbit app will also let you track your weight, sleep and other statistics to help you stay healthy and away from the freshman 15.
The Fitbit Charge 2 also has many other functions other than just tracking your health. The tracker doubles as a smart watch, which will help you keep track of when you have classes and lets you know when you have a call, text or calendar alert.
2. Mini Portable Charger — $14.99
 What’s sort of product gets over 25, 000 positive reviews? Check out what your peers said:https://t.co/NqvYUit36A pic.twitter.com/3meVUxhGBY
 — Anker (@AnkerOfficial) May 17, 2017
College students are always on the go — and so are their phones. Stop being that person who is always either carrying around their phone charger or constantly complaining about their phone dying. Pop one of these mini chargers in your bag to keep your phone charged and ready to call an Uber all night long.
This Anker mini portable charger available on Amazon will add another full charge to your phone. It takes about 2-5 hours to recharge, so make sure you charge it at night alongside your phone.
3. WD 1 TB Portable Hard Drive — $60.61
 Keep your files as organized as your gear with the My Passport for Mac. pic.twitter.com/KgqLXCWlxp
 — WD® (@WDCreators) May 21, 2017
Having a portable hard drive can be a lifesaver, especially if you are a film, journalism, graphic design or photography major and own a Mac. This portable hard drive is just like a USB drive except it can hold a lot more storage. This WD drive can hold up to 1 TB and will keep your computer from being slowed down by all of your files.
This WD drive is also password protected, so no one but you will be able to get the data stored on the computer. This makes it a trusty travel companion for anyone who is studying or traveling abroad and wants to back up files in case the computer is stolen.
Find the WD drive on Amazon.com for $60.61. Amazon also has a plethora of other portable hard drives with even larger storage capacities.
 4. Wireless Bluetooth Speaker –$21.95
 #BuyPayoff #Amazon #AmazonProducts #BestBuy Wireless Bluetooth Speaker, ZOEE S1 Outdoor Po… https://t.co/rIdSGvRiUg pic.twitter.com/xolLfELMEt
 — BuyPayoff.Com (@BuyPayoff) April 17, 2017
Impromptu house parties? All you need are red Solo cups and this wireless speaker. This speaker by ZOEE also has an FM radio in case you want to shake things up from your Spotify mix.
Get this speaker on Amazon’s website. There are also a full lineup of cheaper and more expensive speakers to suit your DJ-ing needs.
5. Vaultskin ETON Armour Phone Case — $15.99
 Be passionate about your life. Be passionate about Vaultskin. pic.twitter.com/NDcP31Tx7y
 — Vaultskin (@Vaultskin) March 5, 2016
This is a very low tech item with a very important purpose: to keep your life together. When you go out to a party or bar do you really want to be carrying around a purse or wallet that could get stolen or lost? No, you don’t. That’s why its so helpful to have a phone case that doubles as a wallet.
With this Vaultskin phone case you can hold up to eight cards in the magnetic pocket and two cards, a key or some cash in the front pocket. 
6. Macbook Air — $999
 RT macworld: MacBook Air: What you need to know about Apple's most affordable laptop https://t.co/7T21e5LFPf pic.twitter.com/YpmH3Ezq1n
 — Bill Hart  (@bhart62) July 8, 2017
This computer will no doubt set you back nearly a thousand dollars, but if you’re looking to buy a new computer the Macbook Air may be just for you. It’s light and easy to use, and while some people may try to get you to buy a tablet, having a keyboard attached to your screen is just so much easier.
The Macbook Air is an incredibly fast and powerful laptop packed into a small body that only weighs a few pounds, making it the choice computer for thousands of college students across the country. Many prefer the IOS operating system to a Windows computer, especially for graphic design and video or photo editing, but that’s up to you. 
A huge setback with the Air, however, is its low storage capacity. Consider buying an external hard drive and upgrading the Air’s storage. Also consider buying refurbished — it can save you a ton of money.
Kellie Bancalari is a student at George Washington University and a USA TODAY College digital producer.
