Twitter bans Breitbart writer tied to racist tweets
Twitter banned conservative writer Milo Yiannopoulos from the social media service, part of a broader crackdown on offensive content after actress Leslie Jones reported receiving a flood of racist tweets.
Yiannopoulos confirmed the suspension in a story on Breitbart, where he works as technology editor. A search of his account, under the Twitter handle @nero, pointed to a statement saying the account was suspended.
The suspension is linked to a series of racist and sexist tweets hurled at Jones, who stars in the reboot of Ghostbusters, a film which has been subjected to months of Internet scorn in part because of the all-female lead cast. The tweets — including several photos of apes — flooded Jones' timeline during an exchange with Yiannopoulos during which he calls her "illiterate."
"I leave Twitter tonight with tears and a very sad heart," wrote Jones on Twitter, after sharing some of the messages she received. "All this cause I did a movie."
In a statement, Twitter says staff spotted an increase in accounts violating policies related to abuse, and has taken "enforcement actions" against them. The statement did not specifically reference Yiannopoulos nor confirm his permanent removal from Twitter.
"People should be able to express diverse opinions and beliefs on Twitter," said the company statement. "But no one deserves to be subjected to targeted abuse online, and our rules prohibit inciting or engaging in the targeted abuse or harassment of others."
Some cases involving "trolling" on Twitter include an influential user encouraging followers to bombard a specific account with tweets. In many cases, users will create fake accounts to harass another users.
In a statement on Breitbart.com, Yiannopoulos called the suspension "cowardly" and questioned Twitter on its willingness to support conservative opinions.
"This is the end for Twitter," said Yiannopoulos. "Anyone who cares about free speech has been sent a clear message: you’re not welcome on Twitter." The suspension prompted the creation of hashtag #FreeMilo, making it one of the top trends in the U.S. early Wednesday.
According to a screenshot on Breitbart of an email to Yiannopoulos from Twitter support, the writer was suspended for violating rules around "participating in or inciting targeted abuse of individuals." 
When asked on Twitter about Yiannopoulos, CEO Jack Dorsey also referenced "inciting" abuse. "We don't ban people for expressing their thoughts," tweeted Dorsey. "Targeted abuse & inciting abuse against people however, that's not allowed."
@wikileaks we don't ban people for expressing their thoughts. Targeted abuse & inciting abuse against people however, that's not allowed
— Jack (@jack) July 21, 2016
After his Twitter account was suspended, Yiannopoulos appeared on Periscope, a live streaming service owned by Twitter, in front of a crowd outside the Republican National Convention in Cleveland to address the suspension, saying he hopes it galvanizes people to leave platforms like Twitter. "Twitter has declared itself an enemy of free speech," he said.
Periscope did not respond for a request for comment on his continued use of the service.
Twitter has a long history of struggling to confront abuse on its platform, despite several moves attempting to address the problem. The company opened up tools to users to make it easier to flag offensive content or accounts. In February, Twitter unveiled a Trust & Safety Council created to review policies and products related to curbing online abuse.
The company acknowledges it still has a long way to go to prevent abuse on its site. "We know many people believe we have not done enough to curb this type of behavior on Twitter. We agree," reads Twitter's statement. "We are continuing to invest heavily in improving our tools and enforcement systems to better allow us to identify and take faster action on abuse as it's happening and prevent repeat offenders."
Follow Brett Molina on Twitter: @brettmolina23.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2aaW2mS
