Report: China demanded U.S. plane leave island airspace
Corrections & Clarifications: A previous version of this story misstated the military branch that flies the P8-A Poseidon. It is the U.S. Navy. The erroneous information was provided by the Associated Press.
China said it is entitled to monitor the airspace and seas around artificial islands in the South China Sea after a reported exchange between its navy and a U.S. surveillance plane, the Associated Press reported Thursday.
CNN reported that on Wednesday its journalists, who had been allowed to join the flight, heard a Chinese navy dispatcher make eight demands that a U.S. P8-A Poseidon surveillance aircraft leave the area as it flew over Fiery Cross Reef.
China is undergoing a massive land reclamation program in the South China Sea, parts of which are claimed by five other countries, including U.S. treaty ally Philippines.
The U.S. says the string of artificial islands the nation is building could be used as military bases from which the country could attempt to restrict air and sea traffic.
On Thursday, China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei reiterated Beijing's claim of indisputable sovereignty over the islands, and said it entitles China to keep watch over the surrounding area to "maintain national security and avoid any maritime accidents," according to the AP.
Secretary of State John Kerry
 said during a recent visit to China that the U.S. was "concerned about the pace and scope" of the project.
He said he had urged China through Foreign Minister Wang Yi "to take actions that will join everybody in helping to reduce tensions and increase the prospect of a diplomatic solution."
Contributing: Kirk Spitzer

 Obama: Beau Biden made you want to be a better person 

 Female sex pill moving closer to market 

 Woman says Hastert sexually abused her brother 

 Top Aide to Saddam Hussein Dies in Hospital 

 These are the most (and least) valuable states in America 

 Josh Duggar's sisters speak out in defense of brother 

 Random act of kindness by waitress will melt your heart 

 Obama eulogizes Beau Biden at Del. funeral 

 Beau Biden's brother, sister tearfully say goodbye 

 Manhunt underway in New York for escaped killers 

 S. Korea vows to curb growing MERS outbreak 

 Obama highlights alliances ahead of G-7 meetings 

 Senate passes USA Freedom Act 

 Snakes take over home, couple sues realtor for $2M 

 Local Prosecutor: No reports of Hastert misconduct at school 

 3-year-old beaten to death for not being 'potty trained' 

 Report shows frequent TSA failures 

 Man arrested after dog found with snout taped shut 

 NTSB report on Philadelphia Amtrak train derailment released 

 Bosnian catholics await Pope's visit with great hope 

 How France got its own Republican party 

 Families of americans held in Iran call for their release 

 Americans With Disabilities 'striving to Work' 

 Death toll rises to 2,300 from India's heatwave 

 Solar impulse unscheduled landing amazes Japan 

 Iconic 'love locks' being removed from Paris bridge 

 Sirens sound in Israeli school as part of nationwide drill 

 What states with the lowest unemployment have in common 

 Hash oil explosions increase in states with 'legal pot' 

 Okinawa governor is on a quest to stop U.S. base 

 Fighting rages on in Yemen's southern city of Aden 
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Sh8T3a
