USA TODAY Takes Home 4 ADDY Awards
CONNECTTWEET 189 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Fresh off a big Best in Show win back in 2016, USA TODAY scored four ADDY Awards at DC Ad Club’s ‘Adchella’ 2017. The creative team brought home three GOLD ADDYs and a SILVER ADDY for work on USA TODAY’s mobile app relaunch and Rio Olympics campaign.
 The Rio Olympics campaign received a GOLD ADDY for Cross Platform, Consumer Campaign (National) and a GOLD ADDY for Elements of Advertising, Illustration. For work on the USA TODAY mobile app relaunch, the team received a GOLD ADDY for Cross Platform, Consumer Campaign (National) and a SILVER ADDY for Elements of Advertising, Film & Video.
 “Friday night’s wins are a result of an amazing team’s passion and dedication to their craft. I couldn’t be prouder of these guys and am excited to continue pushing boundaries of our creative in this competitive, attention-seeking industry,” said Samir Singh, Creative Director for USA TODAY NETWORK.
 More information on the projects:
MOBILE APP RELAUNCH: While some news sources focus on credibility alone and can come across as stale or boring, others want to be solely entertainment, lacking any substance. USA TODAY lives in a balance between both – delivering entertainment people crave with truthful and trusted journalism they deserve. When it came time to launch our newly designed app, we used the phone as the focus, creating illustrative narratives that touted the fun features along with new content and delivery methods (like virtual reality and 360 video news). This allowed us to seamlessly blend the irresistible with the informative. The campaign ran across USA TODAY print, usatoday.com mobile web, pre-roll, gravity ads, :30 radio spot on iHeart, digital banners, and OOH (Duffy screen Times Square).
RIO OLYMPICS: This year’s Olympics was an exciting blend of the most colorful athletes from around the world, descending upon one of the most colorful cities. Only fitting that the advertising had to live up to how vibrant and celebratory the city, the people, and the USA TODAY NETWORK coverage would be. The campaign included advertising on-site, integrated digital, high impact units, and digital and mobile targeting ads, as well as across our social properties, nationwide in USA TODAY and local market publications, OOH (Duffy jumbo screen in Times Square), eblasts, SEM, PR activations, a poster series, and tradeable lapel pins for fans and athletes alike.
 The ADDYs celebrates creative excellence in the local advertising community with an awards gala annually.
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2nFB3gP
