Bobby Rahal scoffs at notion Americans couldn't compete in Formula One
Stay Connected 


Josef Newgarden celebrates winning the IndyCar Series championship after the GoPro Grand Prix of Sonoma at Sonoma Raceway on Sept. 17, 2017. (Kyle Terada, USA TODAY Sports)
DETROIT — Bobby Rahal laughed before calling BS when asked about recent comments made by Haas Formula One team boss Guenther Steiner, who said no American drivers are “ready” for the European-based open-wheel series.
“Oh, I think that’s all (expletive),” the driver-turned team owner said with a smile while at the Detroit Auto Show for the unveiling of the 2018 Indy car. “But that’s the European mentality. You’d think Dan Gurney, God bless his soul, and Mario Andretti and Phil Hill, and guys like Bob Bondurant and those guys, have all proven Americans can compete on any stage. But Europeans are very provincial in their outlook.”
Rahal added that he would love to see his someone such as his son, Graham Rahal, or reigning Verizon IndyCar Series champion Josef Newgarden take a crack at F1 and prove Steiner wrong, but he doesn’t see that happening any time soon.
And not because Graham Rahal or Newgarden wouldn’t seize the opportunity.
“I think they’d do quite well,” Bobby Rahal said, “but it’s pretty much a closed society over there.”
Rahal is referring to Formula One’s feeder system — with series such as Formula 2 and Formula 3, among others — and Formula One teams primary look to those series to develop their drivers.
For example, Haas, an American-based Formula One team, employs Switzerland’s Romain Grosjean and Denmark’s Kevin Magnussen, both of whom came up through Europe’s developmental series.
“The only way I could see (an American landing in Formula One) is if there’s an American company that got in there and wanted to go to Formula One and was insistent on an American driver,” Rahal said. “But until then, it’s kind of just more of the same from the Europeans.”
Of course, Rahal wasn’t the only one irked by Steiner’s comments. Graham Rahal, Conor Daly and Andretti all vented their frustration via Twitter recently, with Andretti calling Steiner’s comments “wrong and arrogant.” The auto racing legend later explained to IndyStar that he was most troubled that Steiner has never given American drivers a chance.
“Did he ever try to ask anyone? Did he ever try to give anyone an opportunity? No,” Andretti said. “So that means he’s just demeaning and devaluing the talent that we have here. And I think that’s not right.”
If Steiner had reached out, Andretti said, he would have discovered that the United State has a wealth of emerging young talent fully capable of challenging the Formula One elite. That is, of course, if they had the right equipment, which means they probably shouldn’t sign up with Haas anytime soon, Andretti added with a chuckle.
“You tell me a guy like (Newgarden) wouldn’t win with one of the top teams like Mercedes, Ferrari or Red Bull?” Andretti asked. “Of course he could. Maybe not with Haas, though. … If I was in position that Josef Newgarden is in and Haas asked me, I would say no.”
MORE INDYCAR:
