High Profits - CNN
Does this 'peaceful little pot shop' have a future?
Episode 8: The BCC is faced with tough business decisions after town council voted against them. 

The Breckenridge voters have spoken
Episode 8: Town council react to the vote against marijuana stores on Breckenridge's Main Street. 

Walking two miles for weed
Episode 8: BCC customers react to news that the shop on Main Street will no longer sell weed. 

Pot's thriving black market
Episode 7: Rather than wiping out pot's black market, legalizing marijuana in Colorado has helped illegal trade thrive. 

Marijuana on Main Street leaves a town divided
Episode 7: While some in Colorado wish to keep marijuana businesses out of downtown, others fight for free market rights. 

Will Brian and Caitlin be forced out of downtown?
Episode 7: Can the Cannabis Club stay on profitable Main Street or find a less desirable location? The voters will decide.

Hashing out a business plan
Episode 6: As marijuana concentrate sales grow, the owners of BCC turn to their resident expert. 

Is eating marijuana riskier than smoking it?
Episode 6: Edible marijuana products are the toughest ones to ensure consistent potency.

So you want to work at a cannabis club?
Web extra: Caitlin McGuire, owner of BCC, explains how to be a good cannabis club employee. 

Shredding $1 million worth of weed 
Episode 5: The BCC Garden has to cut down 80% of its garden to keep up with regulations. 

Will there be a household name in weed?
Episode 5: The wholesale market for marijuana is heating up. Who will cash in?

Is Breckenridge a party town or 'Disneyland'?
Episode 5: Residents of Breckenridge, Colorado, disagree on how to sell their town's image.

Selling marijuana as medicine: Is it ok?
Episode 4: What's the difference between cannabis-based medicine and the medical marijuana movement? 

Is this a million dollars' worth of marijuana?
Episode 4: See the "real bread and butter" of a legal marijuana business. 

Cornering weed's wholesale market
Episode 4: As the business of legal marijuana grows in Colorado, Katherine Grimm outlines her dream of an empire.

High risks for legal marijuana money
Episode 3: Because marijuana is federally illegal, the banks don't accept the industry's cash. Brian and Caitlin discuss the dangers.

Are marijuana dispensaries an easy target?
Episode 3: Routine deliveries are stressful -- and a safety concern -- when the cargo is legal marijuana.

'We have to protect Main Street'
Episode 3: Breckenridge's Town Council hears arguments against letting BCC stay on Main Street. 

Marijuana garden faces high demand
Episode 2: The Breckenridge Cannabis Club runs into a supply problem when their garden isn't producing enough marijuana. 

Weed-themed float rolls down Main Street
Episode 2: The Breckenridge Cannabis Club readies its float for the 'adult party' of Ullr Fest in Breckenridge, Colorado. 

Meet Breckenridge's 'weed genius'
Episode 2: Nick Neidlein grows marijuana for a living in the CNN Original Series "High Profits."

Mapping out a legal marijuana empire
Episode 1: Brian Rogers and Caitlin McGuire, owners of Breckenridge Cannabis Club, start to grow their legal recreational marijuana business.

Cashing in on the 'green rush'
Episode 1: See the first day of legal recreational marijuana sales in Breckenridge, Colorado.

Is marijuana mainstream enough for Main Street?
Episode 1: Anti-marijuana activists mobilize against the Breckenridge Cannabis Club's storefront.
