Celebrities | Entertain This!
Malia Obama gets cozy with her British boyfriend
Rory Farquharson, like Obama, is 19 and attends Harvard University.

Kidman celebrates over-40 actresses at SAG Awards
"...Twenty years ago we were pretty washed up by this stage in our lives," Nicole Kidman said at Sunday's SAG Awards.

Millie Bobby Brown's sneakers won the SAG Awards
The 'Stranger Things' star won the red carpet with her white Converse kicks.

SAG Awards: What stars are saying about Time's Up
Celebs shared their support for the anti-sexual harassment movement in Hollywood and their thoughts on the movement in general.

Brie supports Franco amid sexual misconduct claims
E!'s Giuliana Rancic asked Alison Brie about the claims of inappropriate sexual behavior against her brother-in-law James Franco.

Pompeo talks Weinstein, salary in interview
Pompeo, who was named the highest-paid dramatic actress in 2017, opened up about her salary in an interview with 'The Hollywood Reporter' Wednesday,

Are January Jones and Nick Viall dating?
'Page Six' reported Monday that the two are an item, sending Twitter into a spin.

Duchess Kate shows beginnings of a baby bump
Kate wore a blue-and-black ensemble during a Wednesday visit to Reach Academy, one of her royal patronages.

See new photos of Princess Charlotte
Prince William and Duchess Kate shared a pair of new photos of 2-year-old Princess Charlotte on her way to her first day of nursery school.

Globes: Advocates were on the arms of stars
Some actresses took a stand against harassment and workplace disparities with their Golden Globes. guests.

No male Globes winners mention #MeToo, Time's Up
Sunday's awards may have centered around Hollywood's assault revelations, but the male honorees didn't speak about them during their time onstage.

Laura Dern, Nicole Kidman condemn abuse
The women of 'Big Little Lies' swept their categories at the Golden Globes on Sunday night.

Natalie Portman savages Golden Globes' 'all-male nominees'
Portman got fiery when she presented the award for best director.

Golden Globes: Couples hit the red carpet
Movies and TV aren't the only things shining at the Golden Globes — so are the celebrity couples.

Teigen battles Pizzagate conspiracy theorists
Teigen spent the last weekend of 2017 defending her daughter Luna against Twitter trolls linking her family to Pizzagate.

Britney Spears, boyfriend celebrate last show
Her boyfriend posted cute Instagram videos in support of his "partner in crime."

How the stars celebrated Christmas
The Cyrus girls blasted *NSYNC's 'Merry Christmas, Happy Holidays.'

Michael J. Fox is back as Marty McFly, in LEGO form
It's been 30 years since Michael J. Fox first embodied Marty McFly, but the actor still has the pipes for the part. Fox is voicing the LEGO McFly in video game LEGO Dimensions, which hits stores September 27.

Ranked: The 50 biggest songs of 2017
USA TODAY looked at the biggest tracks released in 2017, by sales and streaming numbers, to see which have staying power.

See Prince Harry, Meghan Markle's engagement pics
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle released photos from their engagement Thursday morning, and they're a dream.

See new family photo of William, Kate and kids
Kensington Palace shares a new family photo of Prince William, Duchess Kate, Prince George and Princess Charlotte that was used on this year's card.

Trailer: Emma Watson rescues boyfriend from cult in 'Colonia'
It's time for the dudes to be in distress.

Kel Mitchell is back on Nickelodeon, and still loves orange soda
Kel Mitchell was the dimwitted character from '90s Nickelodeon show 'Kenan & Kel.'

Meet the Swiftie behind this massive Taylor Swift corn maze
Ah, the corn maze—a beloved American autumn tradition. And who's a more beloved American icon right now than Taylor Swift?

The Internet didn't like Kevin Hart's 'SNL' monologue
Hart dedicated his monologue to the challenges of parenthood, including a series of jokes about dads' responsibilities versus moms.

'SNL': Omarosa crashes Trumps' Christmas party
The gang was all here for Saturday Night Live's version of Christmas at the White House. Including Omarosa Manigault-Newman.

Net neutrality ruling: Celebrities react
On Thursday, the FCC ruled in favor of overturning net neutrality rules that protect ISPs from blocking, slowing or changing more for certain content.

Late-night TV explains black women vs. Roy Moore
Many late night shows invited black female correspondents to explain high turnout for Roy Moore's defeater Doug Jones.

Jada Pinkett Smith blasts Globes for Haddish snub
Neither Haddish nor 'Girls Trip' were nominated for any Golden Globes this week.

Amber Heard responds to J.K. Rowling about Depp
Both J.K. Rowling and Warner Bros released statements supporting Johnny Depp's casting in the forthcoming Fantastic Beasts sequel this week.

Sheeran is a Member of the Order of the British Empire
Prince Charles made Ed Sheeran an MBE (Member of the Order of the British Empire) during an Investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace Thursday.

Oliver comes for Hoffman over harassment claims
When interviewing Dustin Hoffman, the straight-shooting John Oliver seemingly had one thing on his mind: sexual harassment.

Mila Kunis, Ashton Kutcher make rare red carpet outing
Kunis and Kutcher have been married for years, but generally skip the red carpet together.

Chris Pratt alerts fans to a fake Facebook account
Unfortunately, some online friendships struck up with Chris Pratt might not be legit, as the actor says there is an impostor among us.

Markle is a natural at first official engagement
Meghan Markle suited up for her first official engagement with Prince Harry on Friday in Nottingham.

Gwyneth got Chris and Brad together for brunch
The woman who gave us 'conscious uncoupling' has adopted a new description for her domestic situation: Modern family.

See Meghan Markle's stunning engagement ring
Meghan Markle and Prince Harry's engagement has been announced and we know what you're thinking: You want to see her rock.

Stars mock Trump's 'Person of the Year' tweet
Twitter is making a meme out of the president yet again.

Twitter defends Malia Obama after video surfaces
Twitter pleaded for people to leave Malia Obama alone after a video of the former first daughter appearing to smoke circulated.

Miley Cyrus pregnant? Nope, she just ate Tofurkey
The singer blamed the "bump" on her holiday feasting.

See Meghan McCain's stunning lace wedding gown
See the photo Meghan McCain shared from her nuptials to conservative pundit Ben Domenech.

Seth Meyers, Alexi Ashe expecting another boy
Seth Meyers will likely be giving ultrasounds "A Closer Look." He announced that he and his wife, Alexi Ashe, are expecting another baby.

Duchess Kate goes off-roading with Prince William
The royal couple took their wild ride during a visit to the Jaguar Land Rover's Solihull Manufacturing Plant in Birmingham, England Wednesday.

Kevin Hart, Eniko Parrish welcome son Kenzo
This is the couple's first child together.

Did Pink grimace during Aguilera’s AMAs set?
Pink was sitting in the audience watching Christina Aguilera tribute to Whitney Houston when the camera panned to her pained expression.

AMAs: Selena Gomez debuts blond hair
Gomez brought her new song 'Wolves' — and a new hairstyle — to the 2017 American Music Awards.

Late night hosts condemn 'horrifying' Al Franken
After Leeann Tweeden accused Franken of groping her without her consent, hosts including Stephen Colbert and Seth Meyers tackled the allegations.

Jordan Peele calls 'Get Out' a documentary
"The movie is truth," Peele said on 'The Late Show.' "The thing that resonated to people is truth. For me, it's more of a historical bio-pic."

Watch 'Deadpool 2's Bob Ross-inspired teaser
Ever wanted to see Deadpool with an afro? Here's your chance.

Twitter does not think Blake Shelton is sexy
'People' magazine may have chosen Blake Shelton as their 2017 Sexiest Man Alive — but that doesn't mean Twitter agrees.

Fallon returns to 'Tonight Show' after mom's death
Fallon returned to the 'Tonight Show' on Monday for his first broadcast since his mother, Gloria, died earlier this month. Have the tissues ready.

John Oliver mocks Louis C.K. on season finale
Season four of Oliver's HBO late-night show 'Last Week Tonight' concluded on Sunday.

Beyoncé returns on Eminem's 'Walk on Water'
The two stars teamed up for the rapper's new single.

Taylor Swift 'Reputation': What critics are saying
Swift's highly-anticipated new album dropped Friday.
