PFF grades: Andrew Whitworth has worst game of career vs. Falcons
By January 7, 2018 9:57 am ET  Follow @camdasilva  
 272 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 7, 2018 9:57 am ET  Follow @camdasilva  
In the days leading up to Saturday’s playoff game, six Rams earned first-team All-Pro honors. The NFL-leading list was headlined by Todd Gurley and Aaron Donald, but Andrew Whitworth and the Rams’ three special teams studs – Pharoh Cooper, Greg Zuerlein and Johnny Hekker – weren’t to be overlooked.
Unfortunately, not all of them played like All-Pros in Saturday’s loss to the Falcons. Pharoh Cooper had two turnovers, Todd Gurley only touched the ball 18 times and Andrew Whitworth struggled to keep defenders off Jared Goff.
According to Pro Football Focus, it was the worst game of Whitworth’s career. He allowed six pressures, which was the most of any game he played this season. His overall grade of 36.8 was the worst he’s ever posted since PFF began grading players.
Mere days after being named first team All-Pro left tackle, Whitworth had the lowest-graded game of his entire career. Brooks Reed killed him a handful of times with a spin move, while Adrian Clayborn and Takk McKinley got the better of him with bull rushes. Whitworth allowed six pressures on the day, his highest total all season.
Here were the Rams’ five highest-graded players, led by Donald and his 11 quarterback pressures.
DI Aaron Donald, 97.8 overall grade
CB Troy Hill, 91.7 overall grade
WR Robert Woods, 82.5 overall grade
G Rodger Saffold, 80.0 overall grade
DI Morgan Fox, 78.3 overall grade
Troy Hill has emerged as one of the Rams’ best cornerbacks since taking over for Kayvon Webster, completely shutting down receivers in his area on Saturday night. He didn’t allow a single reception on five targets, knocking away two passes in coverage.
Jared Goff was his usual self with a grade of 73.8, though he struggled under pressure (4-for-12 and three sacks). It wasn’t his worst performance of the year, but he certainly wasn’t particularly sharp either, especially on short underneath passes.
Like this article?
Sign up for the Rams Wire email newsletter to get our top stories in your inbox every morning
Success
 Thanks for signing up.
 You'll be waking up a little more awesome tomorrow. 
Whoa!
 Something went wrong.
