Explore Michael Mina's restaurant empire
At the Aria Resort & Casino in Las Vegas, Bardot Brasserie offers all the elements of a classic French-style brasserie, from signature cocktails like And God Created Woman (gin, byrrh, St. Germain, lemon and Australian bitters) to dishes such as escargot and French onion soup. Biondo Photo LV
 Choices, choices for Bardot’s steak frites: You pick the steak (flat iron, New York strip, filet mignon or double-cut rib eye) and sauce (Béarnaise, au poivre, blue cheese fondue, Bordelaise or horseradish crème fraîche); all versions are paired with beef-fat fries. Alanna Hale
 At Levi’s Stadium in Santa Clara, Calif., the home venue for the San Francisco 49ers, Bourbon Pub offers a regular menu of sandwiches and casual fare, as well as a members-only Tailgate. The latter features a special menu for members on game days. Mina Group
 Locale Market, a collaboration with chef Don Pintabona at Sundial Plaza in St. Petersburg, Fla., sells local and imported specialty products and made-to-order pasta, griddled pitas, burgers and customizable poke bowls that can be eaten on-site or taken home. Mina Group
 With a name inspired by the year of the invention of pilsner beer, Pub 1842 at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas fittingly offers a list of 50 brews. The beers can be paired with a menu of pub dishes and comfort foods, like these barbecue chicken drumsticks. Mina Group
 As its name suggests, Pizza + Burger at the iconic Fontainebleau in Miami Beach focuses on the two fast-food favorites. The Hippie Chick layers a thick slice of marinated and grilled eggplant, crispy zucchini and halloumi cheese with tomato jam and red onion labneh. Mina Group
Last SlideNext Slide

Michael Mina faced a turning point in his culinary career some 15 years ago. The James Beard Award-winning chef was leaving his acclaimed San Francisco restaurant, Aqua, for business reasons and faced starting over.
Enter tennis great Andre Agassi, a friend who would become a key partner who helped to inspire Mina to a whole different level of success. Before opening their first restaurant together, Agassi encouraged Mina to create the structure that would give him the freedom to do what he loves most: cooking and talking to his patrons.
Today, Mina presides over some 30 restaurants in San Francisco, Las Vegas, Miami, Dubai and seven other locations. His concepts span everything from sushi and ramen to comfort food to French cuisine, and include two different steakhouse brands — Bourbon Steak (a more traditional version) and Stripsteak (with a raw bar and sushi).
For matters of the kitchen, Mina has drawn inspiration from Agassi’s ability to mine his best under pressure on the tennis court.
“The mindset with cooking is not that different when you’re playing tennis,” Mina says. “It’s not a team sport — it’s a one-person sport. Really, at the end of the day, when you’re in a restaurant, everyone knows if something goes right or wrong, it’s up to you. You’ve got to surround yourself with everything possible that will give you the ability to be successful.”
For Mina, being successful has meant taking chances, whether it’s converting his long-running SeaBlue at MGM Grand in Las Vegas to the more casual Pub 1842, or launching one of his more recent projects — a rotating pop-up restaurant in San Francisco. Mina Test Kitchen is a 40-seat restaurant that changes its concept every three months, including the current Italian coastal concept and a recent barbecue theme.
“It’s become the way we look at anything we want to do in the future,” Mina says of the pop-up. “If it’s only three months, it should sell out every night. If it’s not going to sell out every night, chances are it’s not that great of a concept.”
However, Mina’s not one to push the culinary envelope to the point where his customers aren’t comfortable. Instead, he sees great hospitality as a tool to guide them to discover new dishes at their own pace.
“If someone wants shrimp cocktail, I will make the best shrimp cocktail they’ve ever had — I have shrimp on the station and will poach it to order. It’s about focusing on how good we can really make it,” he says. “At the end of the day, the goal is to make people happy.”
Browse the gallery above to explore Mina's restaurants and signature dishes, and see former chef empire tours below.
