Conflicting reports surround NASCAR head's involvement in pursuing purchase of Panthers
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 3 COMMENTEMAILMORE
CHARLOTTE, N.C. -- Brian France, the head of NASCAR, is part of a group that wants to buy the Carolina Panthers with France becoming the new major holder, multiple sources confirmed to NBC Charlotte's WCNC, a TEGNA station.
However, NASCAR issued a statement Wednesday night to NBC Sports denying the report that France was involved with a group to purchase the Panthers.
“NASCAR denies the accuracy of the WCNC report. Brian France is not involved," according to NBC Sports.
Current owner Jerry Richardson said he will sell the team at the end of the season after it was revealed that Richardson reached settlements with four employees over allegations of sexual and racial misconduct.
Late last month, NBC Charlotte reported the Felix Sabates, a minority owner of the Charlotte Hornets, was putting a group together that hoped to buy the Panthers and keep them in Charlotte in a new domed stadium.
At the time, Sabates said the stadium had to have a roof to attract a Super Bowl.
“From a financial point of view, we have to generate revenue,” Sabates said.
Sabates Wednesday would not comment on France being part of the group. However, three sources, all in positions to know, confirmed to NBC Charlotte that France was part of the group and would be the majority owner if the deal goes through. NBC Charlotte agreed not to name the sources because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
NASCAR attendance and TV ratings have been declining. It is not known if that played a part in France’s interest to acquire the Panthers or if he plans to sell his stake in NASCAR to finance the deal.
NBC Charlotte reached out to France at NASCAR headquarters but did not get a response. 
Jerry Richardson has said the team will be for sale after the last game of this season, which could come as early as this Sunday night if the Panthers lose to New Orleans in the first round of the playoffs.
Gallery: NFL postseason power rankings
