5 things you need to know Monday
What to watch for Monday at the Rio Olympics
The 2016 Rio Olympics continue with a full day of action on Monday, featuring some big names for Team USA. All-around champion Simone Biles looks to add to her medal count in the women's balance beam individual competition, while men's gymnastics looks to grab medals in the vault and rings competitions after a rough go in the all-around and team finals last week. On the track, Emma Coburn will compete for the USA's first women's 3000-meter steeplechase medal, and six-time medalist Allyson Felix races for her first individual gold medal in the 400. The Games are broadcast across NBC's networks or live-stream at NBCOlympics.com. Didn't catch the games Sunday? Here are five things you missed. Follow all our journalists on the ground in Rio and get the fastest news and analysis by following @usatodaysports on Twitter.
Rescue efforts continue in flooded Louisiana
Rescue efforts continued Monday after historic rain paralyzed much of southeastern Louisiana and floodwaters wreaked havoc in the battered region. Over the weekend, storms flooded farmland, submerged homes and made roads impassable. More than 20,000 people and 500 pets were rescued, and at least 10,000 people are in shelters. On Sunday, the death toll from the flooding rose to at least four.

 Tray Blazier pulls a boat as he helps a friend check on his flooded home Aug.18 in Sorrento, La. Last week, Louisiana was overwhelmed with flooding that caused at least 13 deaths and damaged thousands of homes. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
Milwaukee officials to meet after fatal police shooting
Milwaukee city officials, including the mayor, police and community leaders, are scheduled to meet on Monday after a fatal police shooting Saturday set off violent protests in the city's Sherman Park neighborhood. The unrest continued Sunday night as police responded to reports of shots fired and made multiple arrests. Gov. Scott Walker activated the National Guard on Sunday to assist the Milwaukee Police Department, though it was local agencies that responded to the incidents Sunday night. Milwaukee Police Chief Edward Flynn identified the man killed as 23-year-old Sylville K. Smith. Flynn said the officer was wearing a body camera that showed Smith was armed and that Smith turned toward the officer with the gun after being told to drop the weapon.

 A man talks to police in riot gear as they wait in an alley after a second night of clashes between protesters and police in Milwaukee. Darren Hauck, Getty Images
Trump to deliver address on Islamic State 
Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated the state Sen. Jeff Sessions represents. It has since been corrected.
A week after labeling Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama "founders" of the Islamic State, Donald Trump will unveil his plan for defeating the terrorist organization Monday in Ohio. The GOP nominee will claim in his speech that de-stabilization in Syria and Libya fueled the group's growth, Trump adviser and Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions told ABC. Trump last year claimed that he had "foolproof" plan for defeating the Islamic State that he couldn't reveal. His straight-faced efforts to brand Obama as the Islamic State's "most valuable player" generated waves of controversy before Trump later claimed that he was employing "sarcasm."
CLOSE

 At a rally in Erie, Pennsylvania, Donald Trump responded to questions about comments that he made calling President Barack Obama the founder of the Islamic State group, saying he was being sarcastic. (Aug. 12) AP
Study: Most parents put infants in unsafe sleep positions
Most parents put their slumbering infants in unsafe sleep environments, according to a new study that is the first to use video recordings to analyze parent behavior. The American Academy of Pediatrics report released Monday suggests the vast majority of parents put children at risk by positioning infants on their sides or stomachs, using soft sleep surfaces or loose bedding or sharing a bed with a parent, all of which are associated with an increased risk of death. Sleep-related infant deaths are the most common cause of death for babies between one month and one year of age, according to the U.S. government.
BONUS: The “Whopperrito” rolls out nationwide
Burger King officially returns to the Tex-Mex ring Monday as its new “Whopperrito” goes on sale nationwide. It’s part whopper, part burrito and entirely wacky as far as fast-food mashups go. The cheeseburger burrito will cost diners $2.99.
And the essentials:
Weather: Scorching heat persists on the East Coast as heavy rains assail the deep South and threaten parts of the Midwest.
Stocks: Asian shares were mostly higher Monday, following a record-setting week on Wall Street.
TV Tonight: Wondering what to watch tonight? TV critic Robert Bianco looks at the Summer Olympics and Night Manager.
Be inspired: He’s one of the world's best archers, and he has no arms.
If you missed the weekend's news, we’ve got you covered.
You can subscribe to get the day's top news each weekday in your inbox.
Pop in those headphones and listen to the audio version below:
CONNECTTWEET 6 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2btrCvQ
