What fare war? American CEO predicts higher fares
Today in the Sky 
 7 Shares 





The possibility of a looming fare war has been the talk of the airline industry this week.
That was sparked when United revealed plans to grow its capacity in the U.S., part of a push-back against both major rivals and fast-growing “ultra” low-cost carriers like Spirit and Frontier.
While that sound like great news for travelers, it created panic on Wall Street, where airline stocks plummeted Wednesday once analysts had digested United’s plans. At one point, the six largest six U.S. airlines had lost more than $9 billion in stock-market value, though there was some recovery Thursday.
But at least one major airline CEO seems to think talk of a sustained fare war is premature.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 The tail of an American Airlines Boeing 777 peeks out of a hangar at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport on Oct. 14, 2016. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, Special for USA TODAY
 The skyline of New York. American counts its operations operations at JFK and LaGuardia airports as a combined hub, though the airports are separated by a considerable cab ride during normal traffic conditions.LaGuardia was American's eighth-busiest hub (by passengers) in 2015. JFK was ninth. Mark Lennihan, AP
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay

Last SlideNext Slide
American Airlines CEO Doug Parker said Thursday that higher ticket prices are likely on the horizon due to a surge in oil prices. Fuel is among airlines' biggest expenses and is the single biggest expense when oil prices spike as they have in the past five months.
"Fares are too low for oil prices this high, and over time you’ll see that adjust, but it takes time,'' Parker said on the airline's earnings conference call.
Crude oil prices have gone from $50 a barrel to $70 in five months, Parker said. They are at a three-year high. That will cost American an extra $1.8 billion in fuel this year if prices remain at that level, eating into its earnings. The airline will try to close that gap with higher ticket prices.
One thing travelers shouldn't expect: big cutbacks in flights due to higher oil prices, as has occurred in the past. The industry has significantly cut flights after mega-mergers like the US Airways-American deal in 2013, so there's little fat and unprofitable flying in the system. Cutting flights would reduce earnings, Parker said.
American is the world's largest carrier.
IN PICTURES: 30 cool aviation pics
