50 states: 50 cider destinations
Alabama’s Red Clay Brewing Company makes three types of cider in Opelika. The Lakeside Mulberry and Lakeside Tangelo are served exclusively in the brewery’s taproom, which also serves pizzas topped with everything from pineapple to Andouille sausage. courtesy of Red Clay Brewing Company
 Alaska’s only cider bar, Double Shovel, uses Alaskan apples and berries (supplemented with syrups from Washington), to hand craft ciders served up in a cozy Anchorage tasting room, where local food trucks often line up to feed hungry cider imbibers. courtesy of Double Shovel
 A completely unique institution to Arizona, Prescott’s Superstition Meadery brews its own meads and ciders, serving the craft beverages in a taproom and in bottles worldwide. A flight of a dozen ciders and meads offers the most comprehensive tasting, to be paired with tapas and desserts off Superstition’s food menu. courtesy of Superstition Meadery
 Seven varieties of all-natural Arkansas cider are on tap at Black Apple Crossing, which includes live music, trivia and Taco Tuesdays in its mix of cider-fueled weekly events in Springdale. Ciders range from the Cider Gal, made from Gala apples, to the boozy 8% ABV Blackjack, infused with local blackberries. courtesy of Black Apple Crossing
 The California Cider Company’s Ace Cider Pub claims fame as the first cider pub in America. Nine ciders are on tap in Sebastopol, and tasting flights let visitors try every variety. Live music, darts and games keep guests entertained, and outdoor seating, where both dogs and picnics are welcome, completes the relaxed ambiance. courtesy of Sonoma County Tourism
 In Mystic, Conn., B.F. Clyde’s Cider Mill is the oldest steam-powered cider mill in the America, dating back to 1881. Visit for hard cider and apple wine tastings, accompanied by weekend cider making demonstrations led by the sixth generation of the Clyde family in the cider business. courtesy of the Connecticut Office of Tourism
 In Marydel, Del., Rebel Seed opens its tasting room daily and offers guided tours of its cider-making process on weekends. Expect dry, semi-dry and sweet ciders, all of which rebel just a little bit on what you expect a hard cider to taste like. courtesy of Rebel Seed
 In St. Petersburg, Fla., 3 Daughters Brewing has a cider bar and tasting room called The Orchard. Inside, a homemade semi-sweet apple cider and a Florida Key lime cider are on tap, along with guest ciders celebrating the region, like sweet tea, mimosa and dried apricot-flavored ciders. Leisa Rice
 Atlanta’s first hard apple cider maker, Urban Tree Cidery serves its original European-style cider, sweet Georgia-inspired cider and a barrel aged cider in its taproom, which has a BYO food policy and welcomes dogs on the patio. courtesy of Urban Tree Cidery
 Based in Oahu, Paradise Ciders is Hawaii’s first cider maker. The tropical fruit-infused ciders, like the Lei'd Back Lilikoi can be found on tap throughout the islands at bars including Maui Brewing Co. in Waikiki. courtesy of Hawaii Tourism United States
 Chicago’s first dedicated cider bar, The Northman has earned a loyal Illinoisan following since its opening in 2016. The extensive list of ciders on tap, from casks, and by the bottle and can is sourced from across America and Europe, and an in-house cider school teaches cider lovers how to better imbibe in apple beverages. Nick Murway
 Iowa’s The Cider House in Fairfield serves ciders from around the world as well as a house brand, Fishback & Stephenson, which produces 100 gallons a week of creations like the Iowa Strangler made with local organic berries. The Cider House is also an award-winning burger joint, serving humanely raised meat with a variety of toppings. Werner Elmker
 The only cider bar in Kentucky, Lexington’s Pivot Brewing serves a bevy of its own craft ciders on tap, reserving some taps for “guest ciders” to let drinkers try multiple cider styles. Apples are pressed fresh each harvest season, resulting in a steady rotation of unique ciders. Bevin Morgan
 New to New Orleans as of July, Louisiana’s Broad Street Cider & Ale crafts its own gluten-free, sugar-free ciders in the city. In the tap room, a variety of ciders flavored with unique strands of yeast are up for the tasting and weekend food pop-ups offer something to nosh on while you sip. courtesy of Broad Street Cider & Ale
 Portland, Maine’s Urban Farm Fermentory is about all things fermented and drinkable, from cider to beer, kombucha and mead. The taproom's 22 rotating taps offer ample opportunity to taste and compare unique ciders and learn more about the fermenting process. courtesy of Urban Farm Fermentory
 Boston’s Downeast Cider House infuses New England flare into its craft ciders – flavored with tart Cape Cod cranberries or berries from Maine. In addition to samples on tap and opportunities to fill growlers, Downeast offers weekend tours of its cidery, should you want a more interactive drinking experience. Cambria Grace Photography
 Established in 1946, Blake’s Family Farm is now a third generation-owned family business in Michigan, out of which Blake’s Hard Cider Co. stems. At the cider house in Armada, seasonal and limited-edition ciders ranging from 6% to more than 12% ABV, and flavored with everything from peppers to pumpkins, are served. Andrew Jowett
 Minneapolis’ Sociable Cider Werks opens its industrial taproom and patio to imbibers eager to drink a wide range of alcoholic apple products. Food trucks park outside to fuel drinkers as they taste their way through hopped and flavored ciders, as well as a unique beer-cider hybrid. Tours are offered each Saturday, and the taproom is closed on Tuesdays. courtesy of Sociable Cider Werks
 The cozy cabin that is Montana’s Lockhorn Cider House offers ample space to congregate at wooden benches under animal antlers, or outside by the fireplace to drink gluten-free, sulfite-free cider, accompanied by a gluten-free food menu. courtesy of Lockhorn Cider House
 Expect to taste completely unique ciders in the Ashland taproom of Nebraska’s Glacial Till. Small-batch ciders may be infused with cold brew or aged in bourbon barrels, while seasonal ciders range from pumpkin spice to a winter blend flavored with peppercorns and star anise. courtesy of Glacial Till Vineyard
 Reno, Nev.'s Piñon Bottle Co. is both a bottle shop and beer bar featuring 36 rotating taps and hundreds of bottles and cans for sale. Rare and craft ciders fall into the mix and can be tasted at the shop or taken home for a cozy hard cider night in. courtesy of Piñon Bottle Co.
 Nine taps of cider brewed in Santa Fe are served at New Mexico Hard Cider, along with plenty of Southwestern fare (like Frito Pies, also known as walking tacos), board games and picturesque orchard views. courtesy of New Mexico Hard Cider
 Upstate New York’s Finger Lakes Cider House, a rustic beacon of all things cider, sits just off the Cayuga Wine Trail. Guided tasting flights may be the best way to learn about distinct types of cider before ordering a pint and carrying it out to the porch. Hyper-local small bites and board games make it easy to spend an entire autumn day at this cider spot. courtesy of Finger Lakes Cider House
 In its four years of operation, Urban Orchard Cider Company has already produced 80 styles of cider, and counting, in Asheville, N.C. The family owned and operated company rotates through fruit-infused and hopped cider varieties to serve on tap at the cider house, all of which can be paired with dips, spreads, cheese and charcuterie from local purveyors. courtesy of Urban Orchard Cider Company
 New to North Dakota this month, Wild Terra is the state’s first urban cidery and cider bar. Homemade traditional and seasonal ciders are on tap as well as regionally and nationally sourced ciders intended to broaden the palates of Fargo’s cider drinkers. Brynn Joki
 Just a few miles from downtown Cleveland, Griffin Cider House keeps Ohio’s cider game strong. Founded by an English transplant who deemed the region’s lack of cider bars grim, this cider pub serves English-style craft ciders with a local twist, like the Honey Oak, which is flavored with four varieties of Ohio honey. Cody York
 Brand new to Pittsburgh, Threadbare Cider and Mead produces titular products with local and sustainable ingredients. Ciders and meads can be enjoyed in the tasty taproom, along with barrel-aged cocktails and pizza, beginning this month. courtesy of Threadbare Cider and Mead
 In Charleston, S.C., Ship’s Wheel Hard Cider doesn’t have a public taproom (yet), but the cidery recommends finding any of its three ciders on tap in the city, like at Charleston Beer Works or Neighborhood Tap House. courtesy of Ships Wheel Hard Cider
 The first craft cidery in Tennessee, Gypsy Circus uses fresh-pressed apple juice to create award-winning ciders in Kingsport. The taproom offers more than 20 types of cider, mead and beer on tap to drink outdoors in the rock garden, near the graffiti wall or on hammocks. courtesy of Gypsy Circus
 The light-drenched wood-paneled taproom at the magical Austin area-based Texas Keeper Cidery is pleasant enough to sit and sip in all day, but come evening, cheese plates, panini sandwiches and live music make this a legitimate all-night hangout in Manchaca. courtesy of Texas Keeper Cidery
 A certain animal mascot may be iconic to Vermont’s cider scene, but go hyper local at Burlington’s Citizen Cider, which serves its own craft ciders and rosé ciders sourced from local orchards, in a wood-paneled tasting room. courtesy of Citizen Cider
 With an expansive patio overlooking Virginia’s Blue Ridge Mountains, Bold Rock Hard Cider may be the most scenic place in America to drink cider. At the Nellysford Cidery, tours and tastings of craft ciders made from local apples are available daily. Jared Kay
 Select weekends offer the opportunity to tour and taste West Virginia’s Swilled Dog Hard Cider at the family-owned company’s production facility in Franklin, and it can regularly be found on tap across the state, in bars like Iron Horse Tavern in Morgantown. courtesy of Swilled Dog Hard Cider
 In Jackson Hole, Wyo., the picture-perfect Persephone Bakery offers a range of ciders to pair with its Instagrammable toasts and French baked goods. Options range from Sidra, imported from Spain, to Sidre, imported from France, and canned pear cider from Denver’s Infinite Monkey Theorem. courtesy of Persephone Bakery
Last SlideNext Slide

More American than apple pie? Apple cider. Hard cider, specifically, which also has origins in the U.K. and Spain, has been flowing through the USA since colonial times. And now, cider-specific breweries and bars across the nation are helping revive Americans’ love for cider.
Fans of fruit cocktails, shandy and flavored beers may easily be able to see why the gluten-free, apple-fermented beverage is making a major comeback in America, and longtime American cider makers are seeing the fruits of their labor finally become trend-worthy.
“Cider popularity has been on the increase for last 20 years and sales growth has accelerated over the last 10 years,” says Jeffrey House, owner and president of The California Cider Company. When the family-run cidery opened in 1993, only two other U.S. cideries existed, and a cider-focused bar was pretty much unheard of stateside. “Now, there are new ones opening seemingly every day.”
Many cideries open at apple orchards where growers can literally squeeze more profits out of their fruits by fermenting them. The spike in craft cidermaking is also a result of the craft brewing trend, which encourages basically anyone with access to some humble ingredients and an empty bucket to test their hand at booze making. 
Another reason cider is pretty much ubiquitous on traditional bar menus? “Millennials have a big interest in what’s new and different from their parents,” House speculates. Cider can be used in cocktails, pairs well with spicy food and encourages innovation with a range of fruits and flavors.
“Cider was the first alcoholic drink in colonial America and the future bodes well.” he says. “Its market share will only get bigger and bigger: look at what has happened to wine, cheese, coffee and good beer in the states over the last 40 years.”
As cider continues to expand across the country, see where to drink the hard stuff in every state, from cider-dedicated gastropubs to rural cideries, in the photos above. Plus, browse more beverages flowing this fall below.

 When it comes to fall attire, Boston’s Harpoon Brewery knows how to layer: a seasonal hoppy amber ale, the Flannel Friday, is an easy sipper, which embraces notes like mild malt, pine and toast — and it dresses the part. courtesy of Harpoon Brewery
