Cook a Swedish dish with chef Emma Bengtsson
CLOSE

 On our tour around the world in NYC kitchens we stop in Aquavit, Midtown Manhattan's Michelin-starred Scandinavian restaurant. Swedish chef Emma Bengtsson shares her recipe for potato dumplings with lingonberry and bacon. Michael Monday

We're getting in the kitchen with New York chefs preparing international specialties, and this month Swedish chef Emma Bengtsson demonstrates authentic kroppkakor at Michelin-starred Scandinavian restaurant, Aquavit. Watch the video above for the complete cooking demo, and see the recipe below. Plus, check out the chef's go-to ingredients for cooking Swedish fare, pair your dish with a Scandinavian beer, and visit more Scandinavian eateries in NYC when you're not cooking.
Kroppkakor (Swedish potato dumplings) with lingonberry and bacon
(Serves 4-6 people)
Ingredients:
2 lb potatoes
200 g all-purpose flour
2 whole eggs
2 egg yolks
TT salt
1 small onion, diced
2 slices of bacon
1 twig of thyme
1 tsp fresh ground allspice
1 pt mixed mushrooms, pan-seared
Canola oil to sear in
Method:
1. Start by baking the whole potatoes in the oven at 325°F for about 1 hour.
2. Remove and discard the peel. Pass the peeled potatoes through a potato press or a sifter.
3. Mix the potatoes with the eggs and flour. Season with salt.
4. Shape into golf boll sized balls.
5. Sear the bacon and onion. Once cooked, chop and season with thyme and fresh ground allspice.
6. Press the bacon and onion into the top of each dough ball. After filling, cover the dough up and press closed to seal.
7. Let them sit in the fridge for about 30 minutes before dropping them into boiling water.
8. They will float up when ready. Remove and pat dry.
9. Sear the dried potato dumplings in some oil and serve with the pan-seared mushrooms and lingonberries.
See chef Bengtsson's go-to ingredients
CLOSE

 Swedish chef Emma Bengtsson of New York City's Aquavit shares her go-to ingredients for authentic Swedish, Scandinavian and Nordic cooking. Michael Monday
Pair a pint with your potato dish
Swedish wine may be a reality in a decade or two as climate change opens up new regions for grape production. For now, only a few vineyards exist in the southern tip of the country, and of those making wine, production is small, expensive and consumed locally. Swedish craft beer production, on the other hand, is prolific, but again, most of it remains in Europe.
Because potatoes are practically a blank canvas for pairing with flavor, a range of Scandinavian beer styles can be explored with this dish.
