Smartphones don't kill
CLOSE

 Should the government be able to open a "back door," to smartphones in the name of national security? Consumers sound off in Venice Beach, California. 

Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this column incorrectly described the weapons ban. It was the assault weapons ban, which included some semi-automatic weapons.
SAN FRANCISCO — Smartphones don't kill people. Violent people with guns kill people.
That's why Apple CEO Tim Cook is right to fight the government's latest attack on the privacy of U.S. citizens.
In this case those citizens include the tens of millions of Americans who own an iPhone.
That product was found on a terrorist who, along with his equally-radicalized wife, killed 14 people at a holiday party in San Bernardino, Calif. in December.

But the hateful duo didn't actually kill anyone with an Apple product. For the acts of religiously-motivated executions themselves, they used firearms. Their semi-automatics and other weapons were of a kind sold in stores in cities and towns across America.
Therein lies the genesis of Apple's legal troubles.
The federal government has had limited and inconsistent success in forcing gun manufacturers to put safety features on their weapons.
Remember the assault weapons ban? Law-abiding, gun-carrying citizens and criminals alike can still get those easily at gun shows and firearms dealers.
Since the Obama administration has failed to convince the other two branches of government to both pass and enforce laws that would help prevent terrorists from getting guns, it's now coming after arguably the most innovative company in the land, because Apple's encryption is so good even terrorists buy its products.
The fact that Apple's powerful encryption makes its products beyond the reach of U.S. law-enforcement is indeed no doubt good for its overseas sales.

As corporate hacking attack after attack has shown, such software backdoors give criminal syndicates and foreign governments yet another route into computer networks.
The FBI's argument here is that Americans should give up a fundamental right to privacy and in return get no guarantee that what is found on this phone (or any other) will make Americans safer.
Indeed, given the determination of Islamist extremists -- to kill Americans and urge other extremists to do the same -- some fatal attacks are inevitable in a population of over 300 million citizens.
I personally am grateful for the efforts of law-enforcement officers all over this country who go to work every day to keep Americans safer.
It's truly regrettable that their work is made so much more difficult by the easy availability of weapons and ammunition, at the cost of thousands of gunshot victims every year.

But given how fundamental the right to privacy is to American democracy, the 'give us all your rights so we can keep you safe' argument doesn't justify giving access to personal data without a warrant.
Nor should law-enforcement be allowed to strong-arm Apple into building products that are intentionally inferior.
It's a fight worth fighting, because even if Apple should ultimately lose in court and be forced to weaken its own software, there would be a silver lining for all Americans who want to see a reduction in gun violence of all kinds.
If the government can successfully argue that it has the right to force a company to modify its product, in order to keep Americans safer, the same precedent could be applied against weapons makers.
Whether your favorite amendment is the fourth or the second, this boils down to a civil liberties issue, and Americans should never give those up without a fight.
CONNECTTWEET 10 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1XAmK67
