‘Aerial America’: See a bird’s-eye view of all 50 states
Alabama: Lake Martin Smithsonian Channel 
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay

Corrections and Clarifications: The Mississippi River was mistakenly labeled as the Missouri River in one of the photo captions. 
The Smithsonian Channel's Aerial America isn't just about sightseeing. The show covers each of the USA's 50 states from a sky-high view, giving viewers unique angles on events and stories. While covering each state plus Washington, D.C., the crew flew more than 2,500 hours and covered over 150,000 miles, a length equivalent to circling the world six times. Scroll through the gallery above to tour the USA with Aerial America (and see a marathon of episodes on July Fourth weekend).
To explore more about each of the 50 states, take a look at USA TODAY's 50 state road trip galleries:
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 Alabama - Coastal Connection is a National Scenic Byway that stretches from Grand Bay to Dauphin Island over to the beaches of Gulf Shores, and up the coast of Mobile Bay to the Spanish Fort in Daphne. Coastal Connection Byway
 Colorado - Independence Pass is the highest paved state highway in Colorado, and also one of the most scenic. Beautiful panoramic views of the Sawatch Range of the Rocky Mountains are everywhere. Due to snow and harsh conditions, the road is closed in the winter. HisWondrousWorks, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Georgia - Within the Chattahoochee National Forest in northeast Georgia is the Russell Brasstown Scenic Byway. The 41-mile loop is considered to hold some of the best scenery in the state. It also includes Brasstown Bald, Georgia's highest peak. MattN3lson, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Hawaii - The Road to Hana drive in Maui, which curves along the northeast coast, is considered a bucket list drive, and not only the most beautiful in Hawaii, but one of the most beautiful in the world. Linda Bair, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Iowa - The Loess Hill Scenic Byway in Iowa is also a National Scenic Byway. Along the western edge of the state, the road takes you along the winding ridges of Loess Hills, which are unique geological formations created during the last ice age. Visit Loess Hills
 Kentucky - Old Frankfort Pike is a 16-mile stretch of road in Kentucky, famous for its scenic path through the horse farms that breed famous Derby competitors. Many spots along the route are on the National Registry of Historic Places. ehrlif, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Maine - The Schoodic National Scenic Byway in Maine takes you along the state’s beautiful rugged coast. Discover old lighthouses, historic towns, and Acadia National Park, all while taking in the view of Maine’s famous pine trees lining the Atlantic coast. Mak_photo, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Maryland - On the western side of Maryland is a stretch of road called the Mountain Maryland Scenic Byway that will take you 193 miles over the ridges of the Alleghenys. Trip highlights include Keyser Ridge, historic Cumberland, and the Youghiogheny river. brandonhirtphoto, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Minnesota - The North Shore Scenic Drive takes you along the northern coast of Lake Superior, the world’s largest freshwater lake. Bordered by the Sawtooth Mountains, the trip is filled with views of streams with waterfalls and aspen trees as far as the eye can see. Igor Kovalenko, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Montana - The route that is referred to as Going to the Sun Road is the most famous drive in Montana. It cuts through Glacier National Park with stunning views of the Continental Divide, St. Mary Lake, and endless snow-capped mountains. Teacherdad48, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Nevada - The Lamoille Canyon Road takes you along Lamoille Canyon in the Ruby Mountains. It’s only a 12 mile stretch, but the road is filled with amazing views of the valley and mountain range. In the winter, the road isn’t plowed and is often used for cross-country skiing. trailrunner925, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 New Jersey - The Delaware River Scenic Byway on Route 29 offers great views of the Delaware River as well as many history lessons. The southern part of the route passes the spot where George Washington crossed. Andrew F Kazmierski, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 North Dakota - One of the most scenic trips of western North Dakota passes through the Killdeer Mountains on the Killdeer Mountain Four Bears Scenic Byway. The 64 mile byway provides views of the Badlands as well as the Little Missouri River. Thinkstock, Getty Images
 Oklahoma - Get your kicks on one of the most famous roads in America, as it's also one of the best scenic highways in Oklahoma. Historic Route 66 offers many great attractions such as Totem Pole Park and the Will Rogers Memorial. PicturetakerJoseph, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Oregon - The Pacific Coast Scenic Byway in Oregon starts at the northwest tip in Astoria and winds along the shores of the state. There are various highlights along the way, including nine lighthouses. And keep your eye out for some whale sightings. Ingram Publishing, Getty Images/Ingram Publishing
 South Dakota - South Dakota is famous for its Badlands, so of course one of the most scenic drives in the state is the 30 mile loop on Highway 240. Check out all the unique rock formations and native grasslands that this area of the country is famous for. zrfphoto, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Tennessee - The Cades Cove Loop in Tennessee is one of the shorter scenic drives on our list. Only 11 miles, the one-lane road offers beautiful valley views of the Great Smoky Mountains as well as historic homes from the community that settled in the area in 1818. Wilsilver77, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Texas - Texas is known for long stretches of roads to nowhere, but north of the town of Quitaque is the Palo Duro Canyon State Park. There you will see the Palo Duro Canyon and the Caprock canyons, both majestic rock formations worthy of a scenic rendezvous. zrfphoto, Getty Images/iStockphoto
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay

Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 Alabama - Selma Bridge was the site of a infamous conflict referred to as Bloody Sunday. In 1965, armed policeman attacked civil rights demonstrators as they were attempting to march to Montgomery, the state capital. The bridge is now a National Historic Landmark, designated in 2013. Mike Norton
 Alaska - The Denali range in Alaska boasts the highest mountain peak in North America, making it a popular destination for climbers and sightseers alike. It recently made news when President Obama declared the peak would no longer be officially referred to as Mt. McKinley, as it had been since 1917. PhotosbyAndy, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Arkansas - In 1957, after a Supreme Court ruling legalized the integration of public schools 3 years earlier, nine Black high school students attempted to enter Little Rock Central High School. The students were greeted by a mob of angry white people and then escorted away by police. gnagel, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Connecticut - Like much of the Northeast, Connecticut‘s early history is often tied to its proximity to the sea. Mystic Seaport is a top spot for learning about Connecticut’s history with whaling and fishing, among other maritime pursuits. Mona Makela, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Florida - Florida is known for many things, but maybe one of the most famous is Walt Disney World. Given that the resort is the number one vacation destination in the world, Cinderella’s castle has to be the state's top landmark. Disney
 Hawaii - Pearl Harbor on Oahu, Hawaii was the scene of an infamous surprise military attack by Japanese airmen on U.S. troops and ships stationed there. Over 2,400 Americans were killed. The war memorial at the site is the number one visitor destination in Hawaii. Master_Yendor, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Idaho - Craters of the Moon is a protected National Preserve with three large natural lava fields and surrounding grasslands. The Great Rift of Idaho is an area of the preserve that has open rift cracks in the earth, including the deepest known in the world at 800 feet. zrfphoto, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Illinois - Given that Chicago is one of the most famous cities in the world, it’s no surprise the most iconic landmark in Illinois resides there. The Bean is properly called Cloud Gate and is a sculpture by artist Anish Kapoor located in Millennium Park. starmaro, Getty Images
 Maine - Portland Head Light is an iconic lighthouse on the shores of Maine. Not only is it the oldest lighthouse in the state but arguably the most picturesque. It’s often depicted in paintings and other artistic representations of Maine. agaliza, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Massachusetts - Every American child learns about the pilgrims and Plymouth Rock, where they arrived in 1620. Except reference to an actual rock wasn’t written until 1741. Plymouth “Rock” essentially memorializes the harbor in Plymouth, a popular tourist destination. peterspiro, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Michigan - The Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn pays tribute to the man credited for paving the way for the modern car market, mass producing his Ford model cars. The large museum, all about innovation and ideas, is a popular destination in Michigan. From the collection of the Henry Ford Museum
 Mississippi - The birthplace of blues is one of Mississippi’s proudest claims, and the Blues Trail takes you on journey through its history. The tour guides you through the towns of BB King, Big Jack Johnson, and Bo Diddley, just to name a few. BluesBoyBob
 New York - Not only a landmark for the state of New York and New York City, but the Statue of Liberty is a proud symbol of American freedom. It was gifted to the United States by the people of France and dedicated in 1886. Marek Slusarczyk, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 North Carolina - While the Wright Brothers first flight at Kitty Hawk could be argued as North Carolina’s most famous landmark, it’s really just a strip of land. The Biltmore Estate, on the other hand, is a grand, luxurious mansion with gorgeous gardens and extravagant furnishings. Rauluminate, Getty Images
 North Dakota - The Badlands of North Dakota are famous for being one of Theodore Roosevelt’s favorite places to visit. Much of the area is now Theodore Roosevelt National Park to honor his love of the state. Within the park is an area with beautiful rock formations and expansive views of the canyon referred to as “Painted Canyon.” jerryhopman, Getty Images/iStockphoto
