Why did the Cardinals give Jhonny Peralta so much money after his suspension for PEDs?
2.3k shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 

Shortstop Jhonny Peralta (PHOTO: Rick Osentoski/USA TODAY Sports)
Shortstop Jhonny Peralta signed a four-year, $53 million free-agent contract with the St. Louis Cardinals on Sunday. In 2013, Peralta hit .303 with 11 home runs and missed 50 games due to suspension after baseball’s investigation into the Biogenesis performance-enhancing drug scandal. 
Diamondbacks reliever and union representative Brad Ziegler was disappointed by the news. 
 It pays to cheat…Thanks, owners, for encouraging PED use “@JimBowdenESPNxm: Peralta – Cards agree to 4-year deal: http://t.co/rkpdAO3QaL”
 — Brad Ziegler (@BradZiegler) November 24, 2013
If Ziegler knows he is clean and believes performance-enhancing drugs do, in fact, enhance performance, he’s right to be mad. He stands to compete for wins, money and playing time with players who might not be deterred from cheating by MLB’s current joint drug agreement. 
But does anyone think the Cardinals signed Jhonny Peralta to a $53-million contract without at least Googling him first? 
Peralta was not signed because he cheated; he was signed despite his cheating. And the heft of his contract reflects a couple of things. The first is the ever-escalating price of free agents. The second is that teams don’t seem terribly worried about signing players associated with performance-enhancing drug use. 
“Character and makeup are something we weigh into our decision-making,” general manager John Mozeliak said. “In his case, he admitted what he did, he took responsibility for it. I feel like he has paid for his mistakes, and obviously if he were to make another one, then it would be a huge disappointment.”
The Cardinals are about as respected an organization as exists in baseball, with their perennial winning and their reputation for playing “The Cardinal Way.” That they’re willing to tie up so much salary in a player wearing a scarlet PED indicates that they’re not as broken up about Peralta’s immorality as many in the media and fanbase who’d like him banned for life, and that they’re not overwhelmingly concerned that his past success came solely because of his juicing. 
So what’s that about? 
Because we have no certain way of knowing how many players have used PEDs and when they did so, it’s impossible to determine the full benefits of the drugs. We have anecdotal evidence, certainly, but it seems unlikely a player can go from lousy to good on the strength of steroids alone. 

Cardinals GM John Mozeliak discusses signing Jhonny Peralta to a free-agent contract. (PHOTO: Jeff Roberson/AP Photo)
Lots of total scrubs have been caught juicing in the past, and it could be the Cardinals believe Peralta’s recent (and good) performance reflects his talent more than it does his body chemistry. And maybe Peralta would have made much more money if he went into free agency untainted, and the current salary represents the money the Cardinals believe he’s worth without PEDs. Perhaps the uncertainty alone cost him millions.
But there’s another factor at play, too — the one Ziegler referred to when he called out the owners. A team paying lots of money to a player like Peralta has little incentive to try to stop him from cheating. 
If Peralta goes down that road again and gets caught, it comes with no financial risk to the Cardinals. Sure, they lose him from their lineup, but they wind up with a mulligan on his paycheck (and 100 more games of Pete Kozma at short) for the length of his suspension. Plus, they would reap any and all additional wins they gained from Peralta’s indiscretions before he got caught. 
Last week, I wrote that MLB should punish teams in some way for their players’ steroids use. On Monday, a FOX Sports report says that might just happen. 
Financial disincentives also could be instituted for PED users and the teams that employ them. A player could have his free agency delayed for a year. A team might be required to make a significant additional payment – perhaps through a donation to PED education – if it signs a past, confirmed user.
OK, but not perfect. Since Peralta already served his suspension, it makes little sense to punish the Cardinals for giving him a second chance and paying him his market value. What the club — and every club — should bear is more risk. 
If the Cardinals knew that any future suspensions for their new shortstop would not bring them payroll relief, they’d take on additional monetary risk in signing him. In that case, Peralta likely does not take home as much money in free agency. 

The Yankees owe Alex Rodriguez $25 million in 2014, unless he’s suspended for PED use. (PHOTO: Andrew Mills/THE STAR-LEDGER via USA TODAY Sports)
When players get suspended for anything, teams should be forced to pay out the suspended players’ salaries and have them count against the luxury-tax threshold. Maybe — ideally — the money goes to charity, either to educate kids about the dangers of PEDs or for whatever noble cause is agreed upon by the league, owners and MLBPA. It’d be a complicated thing to get done, certainly, but it seems a pretty simple way to curb steroid use. 
Would it entirely rid the game of cheating? Of course not. As long as there’s competition, people will look for competitive advantages. That has always been and will always be the case. 
But MLB teams should not benefit from players cheating without suffering any repercussions. Until that happens, there will be no real incentive for teams to police steroid use internally or to reward the free agents they believe will stay clean.
