Marvel's Guardians break out at Disneyland Resort
"Lord Almighty, I feel my temperature rising," crooned Elvis Presley on the soundtrack. What I felt rising, however, was my ride vehicle as it shot like a rocket to the top of the tower and lifted me out of my seat for the first of many bouts of free-floating airtime. Before I had a chance to catch my breath, I plummeted precipitously. It was a tough assignment, but it served a higher purpose: to help free the imprisoned Star-Lord, Peter Quill, and his intergalactic buddies.
I was among the first to experience Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: BREAKOUT! at Disney California Adventure. It replaces the Twilight Zone Tower of Terror and uses its faster-than-freefall ride system to deliver what felt like even wilder thrills than the original attraction. The first major Marvel-themed ride at a Disney park in the USA, Guardians opened on May 27.
Instead of the Hollywood Tower Hotel, the 13-story building is now the fortress of Taneleer Tivan, The Collector. The gaudy exterior, with its bronze and gold flourishes, is an imposing site on the park's skyline. A larger-than-life gold statue of The Collector at the entrance is a testament to his vanity. Inside the fortress are display cases filled with artifacts and species he has collected. Visitors learn that they are V.I.P. guests who have been invited to view the exhibits.
As they wind through the queue in the initial presentation room, guests pass a number of vitrines both on the ground and suspended in the air. Some contain books, strange weapons, and other inanimate objects. One, however, contains a sad-looking dog in a space suit. As with puppies at mall pet shops, I wanted to bust the poor thing out of its cage.
Busting things out of their cages, it turns out, is the whole point of the attraction. A video featuring The Collector (a smarmy Bennicio Del Toro, who, like the rest of the major characters depicted in the attraction, reprises his role from the films) sets up the premise of the ride and introduces his latest and most prized collectible, the Guardians of the Galaxy. The imprisoned heroes engage in some of their trademark banter.

 Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: BREAKOUT! at Disney California Adventure replaces the Twilight Zone Tower of Terror and uses its faster-than-freefall ride system to deliver what felt like even wilder thrills than the original attraction. Richard Harbaugh, Disneyland Resort
 A video featuring The Collector (a smarmy Bennicio Del Toro, who, like the rest of the major characters depicted in the attraction, reprises his role from the films) sets up the premise of the ride and introduces his latest and most prized collectible: Arthur Levine
Last SlideNext Slide
Then it's on to The Collector's private office where an escaped Rocket Raccoon pops out of a ventilation duct and recruits guests to help free the rest of the Guardians. He has a plan, but he needs the guests, who have been granted security clearance, to gain access to the inner sanctum of the fortress. An impressive animatronic character, Rocket moves fluidly and bears a striking resemblance to his film counterpart. (Whether it is the movies or the ride, I have a hard time reconciling the fact that Bradley Copper provides his voice.)
Now entrusted to help break out the Guardians, guests make their way into a room filled with generators, fuel, and sparking electrical lines. "We keep referring to all of the power that is in the building," says Joe Rohde, portfolio creative executive for Walt Disney Imagineering. "We don't want you to miss the point that when we switch the lights off, things will go terribly wrong."
Guests line up to board the gantry where things will go terribly wrong. According to Rocket's plan, he is going to perch himself on top of the elevator and, after guests get him past the security system, he will shut off the building's power. After he pulls the plug and hops onto the gantry, the ride vehicle goes haywire.
There are six different ride profiles, each with its own series of drops and rises. All of the rides begin with a scene in the generator control room where Rocket destroys the systems that keep the cages locked. They all end with the Guardians thanking guests for helping to free them. But in between, there is a random collection of scenes that might appear. The scenes are quick bursts of Guardians-style mayhem and hilarity. The elevator vibrates and hovers in front of each scene, threatening to fall or catapult up at any moment.
Rocket keeps up a steady stream of funny chatter during the ride. For example, when the gantry stops at the top of the tower and the doors open to the outside, he says, "Hey! Is that Disneyland? Cool!" He and the other Guardians generate genuine laughter to go along with the screams and nervous laughter.
Six different songs, all from the same 60s- and 70s-era as Star-Lord's awesome mix tape, accompany each of the ride profiles. In addition to Presley's "Burning Love," other tunes include “I Want You Back” by The Jackson 5 (the only holdover from the film) and Parliament's “Give Up The Funk.” "We were looking for music with a good driving beat," says John Dennis, Imagineering's executive creative director for music.
Starting with a list of several hundred tunes, he and his team got on the ride vehicles and fired up the songs to see which ones made the cut. "The music connects in a way that's even better than we expected," Dennis says. He adds that, as with the Guardians movies, the older songs help bridge generations. Dennis also points out that music has long played a vital role at the company. "Music is an integral part of storytelling going all the way back to Walt Disney. He figured out years ago that music can bypass the head and go straight to the heart." Or, in the case of the Guardians ride, it can go straight to the stomach that churns with each drop.
Some fans were upset when the park announced that the ride would be losing its Twilight Zone theme. However, California's Tower of Terror always paled in comparison to the more sophisticated original in Florida. Now, Disney California Adventure's attraction has its own identity. Guardians is a great blend of intense thrills, quirky humor, and music. With its different ride sequences, it is begging to be experienced over and over. It is also a great entry for the parks into the Marvel Universe. It is, in short, a blast.
Located in the Hollywood Land section of the park, the Guardians building seems out of sync and in violation of Disney's strict themeing code. Rohde, however, has an explanation for the dissonance. "Like in the films, somebody just unzippers the universe. Marvelous objects can appear out of nowhere. That's the world we are talking about."
The world is about to get bigger. According to Rohde and as announced at the D23 Expo, future Marvel attractions are in development.

 Mark Hamill was on hand at the D23 Expo for the announcement of the name of the Star Wars sections of Disney's Hollywood Studios and Disneyland: Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge. Joshua Sudock, Joshua Sudock/Disney Parks
