Experience Kentucky's iconic bourbon distilleries
Woodford Reserve master distiller Chris Morris, left, and master taster Elizabeth McCall roll an empty bourbon barrel outside a rickhouse at the distillery in Versailles, Ky. Morris has helped lead Woodford to the development of several new bourbons and has been with Woodford’s parent company, Brown-Forman, since 1997. McCall is in charge of quality control. Mike Pramik
 Fred Noe, seventh-generation master distiller at Jim Beam, displays his signature bourbon at the Jim Beam American Stillhouse in Clermont, Ky. Jim Beam is the world’s top-selling bourbon. “Our Jim Beam White Label bourbon is a recipe that’s been carried down for seven generations over 200 years,” says Noe, as an image of Jim Beam peers over his shoulder. Mike Pramik Mike Pramik
 Jennifer Cissell, with Jim Beam, pours some Knob Creek bourbon to show how the fully matured spirit is filtered after it ages. Bourbon must be strained to remove “alligator skin,” the solids that flake off the inside of the charred barrels during the aging process. Mike Pramik
 Sadie Franklin flames an orange rind as the finishing touch on an Old Fashioned at the Jim Beam Bourbon Bar in Clermont, Ky. Kentucky passed legislation in 2016 that allows distilleries to serve cocktails on premises, and several have since introduced the service. Mike Pramik
 Maker’s Mark chief operating officer Rob Samuels, grandson of the distillery’s founders, sips bourbon in one of the company’s barrel warehouses. The warehouse contains a glass ceiling, titled “Spirit of the Maker,” which renowned artist Dale Chihuly designed in 2014. “We are a single source of supply,” Samuels says. “Every drop of bourbon that’s been in one of our bottles, it was made right here.” Mike Pramik
 A glasswork titled “Crimson and Chestnut Fiori Boat” is juxtaposed against the pastoral setting of the Maker’s Mark distillery. Maker’s Mark is holding an exhibit of six Chihuly art installations through October. The artwork will glow with light on Saturday evenings. Scott Mitchell Leen, courtesy of Maker's Mark
 Chef Newman Miller stands outside the newly opened Star Hill Provisions, an independent, farm-to-table restaurant serving lunch and craft cocktails on the Maker’s Mark campus. Miller is a veteran chef who grew up 10 miles from the distillery. courtesy of Maker's Mark
 Bourbon fans love to pose with the giant turkey image at the Wild Turkey distillery in Lawrenceburg, Ky. Owned by Gruppo Campari of Italy, Wild Turkey is one of the largest bourbon producers in the world, rolling out a staggering 560 barrels of spirits per day. Mike Pramik
 Wild Turkey master distiller Jimmy Russell, 83, has worked at the distillery since 1954 and is among the best-known bourbon personalities in the world. “Bourbon used to be strictly a southern gentleman’s drink,” he says. “They got their bourbon, cigars and cards, and they went into the back room. But it’s become a worldwide drink now.” Mike Pramik
 In the not-too-distant past, Four Roses blended whiskey had a permanent residence at the bottom of store shelves. No longer. After a 2002 sale of the brand to Kirin Brewery Co. of Japan, former master distiller Jim Rutledge led a Four Roses comeback. A respected bourbon brand once again, it’s in the midst of a renovation that will double its capacity by summer 2018. Mike Pramik
 Brent Elliott, Four Roses’ current master distiller, relaxes in a mash room in Lawrenceburg, Ky., where corn, rye and malted barley are cooked before being fermented. Elliott oversees Four Roses’ bourbon production method, which uses five types of yeast and two grain recipes to yield distinct flavor profiles. “What we do is unique,” Elliott says. “There’s a lot of quality behind the products.” Mike Pramik
 Marcus Niemann, assistant manager of quality at Four Roses, samples bourbon inside the company’s testing lab. Distillers keep a close eye on their products throughout the aging process to ensure quality and consistent flavor profiles before bottling the spirits. Mike Pramik
 Heaven Hill’s Bourbon Heritage Center is the distillery’s main campus in Bardstown, Ky. Heaven Hill makes several bourbons and ryes, including the Evan Williams and Elijah Craig brands. The center is a popular stop on the Kentucky Bourbon Trail. “The trail has just exploded in the last few years,” says Bernie Lubbers with Heaven Hill. “We have the Kentucky Derby, but that’s once a year. This is all year.” Mike Pramik
 Heaven Hill whiskey ambassador Bernie Lubbers stands inside a rickhouse at the Bourbon Heritage Center, where more than half a million barrels are housed. Owned by the Shapira family since its inception, Heaven Hill produced its first barrel of bourbon on Dec. 13, 1935. “Now we’re on 7.6 million barrels,” Lubbers says. Mike Pramik
 Inside the tasting room at Heaven Hill’s Bourbon Heritage Center lies a bottle of William Heavenhill single-barrel bourbon. Distilleries often find certain barrels that have aged particularly well and turn them into specialty bottlings. An example is the Heavenhill bourbon, a 14-year-old spirit that’s available only at the center, for $250 a bottle. Mike Pramik
 Buffalo Trace, owned by Sazerac Co., is situated in Frankfort where thousands of buffalo once roamed, creating traces on their way to the Great Plains. The distillery produces 19 lines of bottled spirits. It's perhaps best known for Pappy Van Winkle’s Family Reserve, a hard-to-find, limited-edition wheat bourbon named after the late, legendary distiller Julian “Pappy” Van Winkle. Mike Pramik
 Alltech’s Pete Weiss sips Kentucky Bourbon Barrel ale at the company’s Lexington, Ky., warehouse. Alltech’s brewery began in 1999 and a few years later took a unique turn when the company started storing beer in used Woodford Reserve bourbon barrels. Kentucky Bourbon Barrel ale, which ages for six weeks, is now distributed in 35 states and seven countries. Mike Pramik
 Bardstown Bourbon master distiller Steve Nally, left, stands with president and CEO David Mandell. Bardstown Bourbon is working with a dozen distillers to produce their whiskies on a collaborative basis. “We provide a completely hands-on experience,” Mandell says. The location soon will include a bar open to the public as well as tours and educational opportunities. courtesy of Bardstown Bourbon
 A fun part of the Kentucky bourbon experience is traveling the Urban Bourbon Trail, a collection of more than 30 bars and restaurants in Louisville that must carry at least 50 bourbons. Here, bartender Tyler Kelly stamps a trail passport at the Old Seelbach Bar in the historic Seelbach Hilton hotel in downtown Louisville. Displayed is the Seelbach cocktail, a combination of Old Forester bourbon, Cointreau and sparkling wine, with seven dashes each of Angostura and Peychaud’s bitters. Mike Pramik
 Angel’s Envy distillery on Whiskey Row in Louisville is the legacy of Lincoln Henderson, the longtime master distiller at Woodford Reserve. Here, you'll find Kentucky straight bourbon aged in port wine barrels to create a rich, smooth finish at 86.6 proof. Now operated by Lincoln’s son, Wes, and grandson, Kyle, Angel’s Envy also produces rye (aged in rum barrels) and cask strength bourbon. Mike Pramik
 Angel’s Envy’s grain tanks are seen from the second floor of the downtown Louisville distillery. Bourbon production began in 2016, so until that spirit is properly aged, Angel’s Envy, acquired by Bacardi Ltd. In 2015, sources spirits from another distillery before putting them up in wine or rum barrels. Mike Pramik
 Forrest Williams, of the Bulleit Frontier Whiskey Experience, leads a public tasting of Bulleit’s bourbon and rye whiskeys after a site tour. Bulleit’s brands are owned by the British beverage conglomerate Diageo and sourced from various spirits producers. That’s destined to change in the future: this year Diageo opened its own Bulleit production facility in Shelbyville, Ky., 30 miles east of Louisville. Mike Pramik
 Daniel Dougherty, a mixologist at the Jim Beam Urban Stillhouse, shakes up a whiskey sour cocktail during the “What’s Your Jam?” class. The downtown Louisville attraction features cocktail-making instruction by appointment, showing patrons how to craft a bourbon drink and then take it to the next level with unique ingredients. Mike Pramik
 The Jim Beam Urban Stillhouse is a working distillery. Visitors can help fill their own bottle of Urban Stillhouse Select 100-proof bourbon, then have the bottle personalized. Jim Beam employees recently created a specially etched bottle that they presented to members of the band U2 before a June concert in Louisville. Mike Pramik
 Kentucky Artisan Distillery in Crestwood, Ky., is a contract distiller that produces Jefferson’s Reserve and Whiskey Row bourbon, as well as Highspire whiskey. Jefferson’s Reserve, created in 1997 by bourbon historian Chet Zoeller and his son, Trey, signed up with Kentucky Artisan in 2012. Whiskey Row is the distillery’s house brand. Mike Pramik
 Distillate flows from a still at Kentucky Artisan Distillery, a craft whiskey producer 20 miles from downtown Louisville that’s open for tours Tuesday through Saturday. Kentucky Artisan sources all of its grains from Waldeck Farms, less than a mile away. Mike Pramik
 Joe Heron, founder of Copper & Kings Distillery in Louisville, stands amid a 4,300-square-foot wildflower bed outside the urban distillery. Copper & Kings is primarily a brandy distiller, and Heron, a native of South Africa, says he’s concerned about pollinator health. “It’s the single-biggest issue facing agriculture other than drought,” he says. Mike Pramik
 Deep inside the barrel room of Copper & Kings, loud, bass-heavy music pulses around brandy aging in once-used oak bourbon barrels. Copper & Kings founder Joe Heron calls it “sonic aging,” as the pounding bass causes the spirit’s molecules to slide. “You agitate and move the liquid around using music,” he says. Mike Pramik
 Corky Taylor, right, chairman and CEO of Peerless Distilling Co., shares a laugh with head distiller Caleb Kilburn as they stand astride the first barrel produced by Peerless. “We’re not making vodka or moonshine,” Taylor says. “We’re not making any products besides bourbon and rye.” Mike Pramik
 Barrel House Distilling Company is a founding member of the Kentucky Bourbon Trail Craft Tour, a collection of 13 distilleries making small-batch bourbon. Like the tour of the larger distilleries, visitors can secure a craft tour passport and wander the rolling, bluegrass hills of Kentucky in search of a more personal tasting experience. Mike Pramik
 Barrel House Distilling Co. is located in an old production warehouse of the former James E. Pepper distilling complex in Lexington, Ky. The building contains Barrel House’s operations as well as a bar and a gift shop in the Lexington Distillery District, which is being revitalized with restaurants and shops. Mike Pramik
 Jeff Wiseman, co-founder of Barrel House Distillery, displays the company’s signature Rock Castle bourbon. Barrel House also produces vodka, rum and moonshine. Wiseman sold his airfreight company to enter a partnership that established the distillery in 2008. “We didn’t have any experience,” he says. “We just had a passion.” Mike Pramik
