Market offers clues to French election outcome
Forget the pollsters. Put down the newspaper. Clues that will reveal who the next French president will likely be can be found in plain sight in financial markets.
European political risk has been one of the biggest market worries in 2017. The reason? Investors remember the unexpected “Brexit” vote last June and President Trump’s surprise win in November. Now they fear Marine Le Pen, the far-right finalist and anti-euro firebrand, will upset Emmanuel Macron, the centrist front-runner and backer of a united Europe, and become president of France.
The final round of the Macron vs. Le Pen vote is Sunday, with Macron leading by a roughly 60% to 40% margin, according to polls.
Investors in search of a proxy for betting on the outcome of the election -- or those who just want to get a good read on which candidate is likely to win -- need to keep an eye on a fund that tracks the French stock market, the euro currency and a broad European stock index.
Just as the rising odds of Donald Trump capturing the White House during last fall’s campaign caused the Mexican peso to crater -- mainly because Trump’s tough talk of building a wall, cracking down on illegal immigration and renegotiating a trade pact were viewed as major negatives for Mexico -- any signs that Macron is comfortably maintaining his lead or Le Pen is moving up in the polls in the final days of the French vote could move markets.
Here are three investments to watch:
•iShares MSCI France ETF (EWQ). This fund, which hit a fresh 52-week high Thursday and is up nearly 18% this year, tracks the broad French stock market and includes blue chip names, such as BNP Paribas bank, cosmetics maker Loreal and airplane manufacturer Airbus.
"It's the ETF to watch during the French Election," notes Josh Selway, an analyst at Schaeffer's Investment Research. If Macron, who is viewed as far more market-friendly and more pro-growth than LePen, holds his lead and it looks like he will win the election, French stocks should rally as political fears fade and concerns about the breakup of the single-market European Union, which France is a member, diminish. Le Pen is in favor of France breaking with the EU.
"A Macron victory will strengthen the underpinnings of the EU," says Joe Quinlan, chief market strategist at U.S. Trust. "It will also boost consumer and business confidence and add further upside to the eurozone recovery. Finally, a Macron victory halts the march of global populism, which is bullish for both U.S. and European multinationals."
•The euro currency. Europe's common currency should also get a lift if Macron defeats Le Pen, as it will send a message of European political and economic stability. "Buy the euro, as it will enjoy a relief rally as another disaster is averted," says Axel Merk, chief investment officer at the Merk Funds. The euro has already risen 2.4% vs. the dollar in the past two weeks. One euro now fetches 1.0986 dollars.
•Stoxx Euro 600 Index. (SXXP) This is a broad index of European stocks from 16 different countries, including France, Italy, Germany Switzerland and Belgium. This index has been in rally mode since Macron and Le Pen emerged from the first round of the presidential election as the two finalists. It has rallied nearly 4% as investors' bet on a Macron win, less political upheaval and improving business conditions in the eurozone.
"European markets are showing the way," says Gary Kaltbaum, president of Kaltbaum Capital Management. But if Macron falters, that could change. "If Le Pen gains ground, markets will turn down."
CONNECTTWEET 5 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2pMcpw6
