The Joker coasters upend riders at Six Flags parks
The "Free Fly" designation refers to the random spinning of the cars. The vehicles are outfitted with magnetic technology that, in conjunction with the weight of the passengers, induces the frequency and intensity of the flips and flops. Six Flags Entertainment
 The ride's compact layout has three levels of track that zigzag out and back. At the end of the first and second levels are "raven turns," elements that send the train falling over the edge and heading 180 degrees in the opposite direction. Six Flags Entertainment
 Unlike more traditional coasters, which capitalize on height, speed, and acceleration, The Joker only drops about 50 feet for each of the turns and never goes faster than 38 mph. Instead of focusing on G-forces, it's more about spinning every which way. Six Flags Entertainment
Last SlideNext Slide

There were already 11 coasters at Massachusetts' Six Flags New England before The Joker opened this year. The new ride, however, is nothing like the park's other thrill machines. Dubbed a "4D Free Fly Coaster" by the park chain, it sends passengers flipping and dropping for a disorienting and unusual, but engaging ride experience.
Outfitted in the DC villain's trademark indigo and green colors, The Joker is a striking and strange sight on the midway. Its trains have four cars, each of which seats two riders. The cars are on either side of the tracks, or the "wings" of the coaster, and face one another. Passengers ascend a120-foot vertical lift hill sitting upright. Then all hell breaks loose.
The train navigates an undulating ribbon of track outfitted with speed bumps, while the cars begin flipping 360 degrees forwards and backwards. This is the "4D" part of the ride. Each car rotates vertically on its own axis (or in the "fourth dimension") and independent of the train's movement. It's like a Ferris wheel gone bonkers that has been mounted on a roller coaster track.
The "Free Fly" designation refers to the random spinning of the cars. The vehicles are outfitted with magnetic technology that, in conjunction with the weight of the passengers, induces the frequency and intensity of the flips and flops.
I was flipping and flopping wildly on my ride aboard The Joker. Once the car started turning, I had no idea which end was up – but it seemed like I was upside down more often than not.
The ride's compact layout has three levels of track that zigzag out and back. At the end of the first and second levels are "raven turns," elements that send the train falling over the edge and heading 180 degrees in the opposite direction. They added to the disorientation (and the thrills).
It's all over in less than a minute (and a fair portion of that is spent climbing the lift hill). Unlike more traditional coasters, which capitalize on height, speed, and acceleration, The Joker only drops about 50 feet for each of the turns and never goes faster than 38 mph. Instead of focusing on G-forces, it's more about spinning every which way.
The ride takes its inspiration from X2, the industry's first 4D coaster, at Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, Calif. One of the world's most acclaimed thrill rides, it is much taller and faster than The Joker, and considerably more intense. It's also significantly more expensive and takes up a lot more real estate. Six Flags challenged X2's manufacturer, S&S Worldwide, to develop a toned-down, smaller, and more affordable ride based on its 4D concept.
The company came up with Batman: The Ride, its prototype free spin coaster, which opened in 2015 at Six Flags Fiesta Texas in San Antonio. It was such a hit that the park chain opened an identical ride, The Joker, in 2016 at Six Flags Great Adventure in Jackson, N.J. Additional Joker clones opened this year at Six Flags Over Texas in Arlington and Six Flags Great America in Gurnee, Ill. as well as the ride at Six Flags New England.
Another ride manufacturer produces a similar 4D coaster, which it calls a "ZacSpin" model. Magic Mountain's Green Lantern: First Flight is the only ZacSpin coaster in the USA. It delivers a jarring and uncomfortable ride. By comparison, The Joker, is quite smooth and comfortable.

 Six Flags announced today that Wonder Woman Golden Lasso Coaster will open next spring at its Fiesta Texas location in San Antonio. Six Flags Entertainment
