Damian Lillard: 'Disappointing' to hear Russell Westbrook's All-Stars remarks
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: NBA Insider Jeff Zillgitt details where the Bucks go after firing head coach Jason Kidd and why it's still too early to panic in Cleveland - despite the latest drama with Kevin Love. USA TODAY Sports

Portland All-Star guard Damian Lillard didn’t appreciate Russell Westbrook’s disparaging comments while stumping for his teammate, Paul George, to make the All-Star team.
Lillard, who was named to the All-Star reserves on Tuesday night, found it disappointing that Westbrook knocked the three-time All-Star’s credentials.
“I respect Russ a lot, so it was kind of disappointing to see him say that,” Lillard said Wednesday night. “Because he’s played against me, he’s played against our team, he knows what I’ve accomplished. Not just this year but over my career. So it was a little bit disappointing, but I know that I earned my spot this year.”
NBA All-Star mock draft: USA TODAY's selections
Even if Westbrook was simply lobbying for George, it’s not hard to see how his comments could be received.
“Unbelievable,” he said. “I think it’s outrageous in my opinion. I don’t know who else made the team, but got four people from one team, you’ve got guys complaining about getting snubbed until they get in, you’ve got guys just talking about it all the time. But the guys that deserve it -- should be in -- are not. I just don’t understand. Doesn’t make any sense.”
Russell Westbrook called it “outrageous” that Paul George was not named an All-Star: pic.twitter.com/62vmKKbFSx
— Royce Young (@royceyoung) January 24, 2018
Lillard said his third selection felt different than his first two.
“Like I said, it’s not my first All-Star Game. But I did have to make this one happen. Everybody knows that the last two years I felt like I should’ve made it and I didn’t.”
The other subplot as a result of their back-and-forth is that George, who will be a free agent this upcoming summer, said Westbrook’s words meant a lot to him.
“Russ is the reason why this decision is becoming even more easier to make, is the character Russ (had),” George told ESPN. “A stand-up guy, and he has his teammate’s back. … It was awesome for a teammate to have your back and to stand up. And to be honest, he should be a starter. He’s been the MVP, been the best player at his position. He should’ve been a starter, but that’s another story. But the fact that Russ had my back, that’s my guy forever, and it’s more apparentwhat this decision needs to be made when it comes down to it.”
George was widely expected to consider leaving Oklahoma City for his hometown Los Angeles this summer, but he’s long prioritized winning over locale. Another All-Star campaign from Westbrook shouldn’t hurt the Thunder’s case.
