Pundits too often bring bias to analysis of police violence: Your Say
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Letters, tweets and Facebook comments edited for clarity and grammar: 
Some far right pundits seem to have no sympathy for black males who are killed by cops.
They often spin statistics and data in order to belittle African Americans. Those misleading numbers allow them to hang on to followers who want to do the same. However, there is always another side to the story.
According to The Guardian, “black Americans are more than twice as likely to be unarmed when killed during encounters with police as white people." Over a four-month period in 2015, the site's The Counted project calculated that about 32% of the unarmed civilians killed at the hands of police were black, 25% were Hispanic or Latino and 15% were white.
The insensitive comments made about blacks who are brutalized by police ignore the facts and satisfy a segment of America who secretly believes that mistreatment of black people is deserved. It was this type of mindset that was used to justify the lynching of blacks in America.
Kevin Palmer; Martinez, Ga.
@USATOpinion@bocougar
We have the technology to abolish police patrols. With our cellphones, we can legally limit cops to 9-11 phone calls.
— James Poirier (@JamesPoirierNYC) October 21, 2016
Did you ever go to a business or engage with someone you thought didn't liked you or was prejudiced against you? If they are a figure of authority you may just want to treat them with a bit more respect and follow their orders. It's common sense. Police officers, in particular, tend to be suspicious as they have to deal with violent criminals and they must be ready to defend themselves and the laws of our nation.
Police officers go through intensive training, but no matter the amount of training, cops are human just like everyone else. That means they may also have bad days, get stuck in traffic and have to deal with personal issues that could affect their moods, just like everyone else. Please respect them to keep incidents from becoming violent.
Russell D. Ward​; Tonawanda, N.Y.

In response to the column by David Couper headlined "Top cop's apology to blacks falls short: Voices": Sure, there were wrongs committed in the past. If we as a nation decide to give out reparations, then let's put the Native American's first. 
 We should also exclude all citizens from contributing to reparations whose ancestors came to this county after the abolition of slavery. They had absolutely nothing to do with the suppression of blacks.
 Before reparations are given, we should also evaluate the "damage" done to each person, as individuals. I'm sure that Ben Carson and Barrack Obama would have to agree that the life they have lived in the USA is due to their hard work and dedication, and that any other black man could have done the same thing.
—Ed Montvidas
@USATOpinion@USATODAY yes! And stop the racial discrimination/ profilong
— Alrak (@bluemoon1943) October 21, 2016
@USATOpinion@USATODAY@bocougar we need more than apologies we need police officers who kill unarmed blk ppl to go to jail
— Victoria Bowman (@Victori53607018) October 21, 2016
Some have said cops shouldn't be blamed for doing their job when it's kill or be killed. What about when it's not kill or be killed? What about when an unarmed man runs from an officer and gets shot in the back? What about after the cops cuff someone and that person is gasping and dying on the sidewalk? What about when the cuff someone, stuff him in a van in a way that's unsecured and then play human pinball with him? Life is not nicely categorized to fit your prejudices. Sometimes it's one way, sometimes the other.
—Dave Cawdell 
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2eCLzh1
