Kentucky school shooting scene: 'No one screamed'
CLOSE

 Listen to the voices from Benton, Kentucky, where a teen opened fire at his high school, killing two students and injuring more than a dozen. USA TODAY

Students at a rural Kentucky high school describe a terrifying scene of gunshots, shock, panic and a wild scramble for safety during a classmate's rampage that left two teens dead and many more injured.
A 15-year old student at Marshall High School in Benton was being held in a juvenile jail and will face murder, attempted murder and other charges stemming from the shooting spree, authorities said.
"No one screamed," said Alexandria Caporali, 16. "It was almost completely silent as people just ran."
The shooting spree is the latest in a long line of such tragedies. Last month a former student at Aztec High in Aztec, N.M., walked into a classroom and fatally shot two students and himself. This month alone, 11 shootings at or near schools have been reported.
In Benton, Bailey Nicole Holt, 15, died at the scene. Preston Ryan Cope, 15, died a short time later at a hospital in Nashville. Eighteen other teens were injured in the chaos, 14 of them from gunshot wounds.
Caporali said she was eating breakfast in the school's atrium when she heard a gunshot and turned to see the shooter nearby. She said she knew him as a happy, quiet boy who played music. Caporali took refuge in a classroom as shots continued to ring out.
“It was one right after another – bang, bang, bang, bang, bang,” she said.
Heather Ligon, mother of two teens at the school, said her sons described the shooter as someone who was cracking jokes whenever they saw him. Ligon said when she arrived at scene, her youngest son Bryan, 14, crawled to her in a panic.
Bryan told her he had been close enough to smell the charred gunpowder from the shooter's handgun.
Lexie Waymon and Baleigh Culp, both 16, said they had been talking about basketball and makeup when they heard a bang. Culp said she thought nothing of it "until I saw a body drop on the ground and the bangs continued." Bullets, she said, were "flying everywhere."
Culp ran to the street, continued to hear shooting behind her, and kept running until a man pulled her into a business where other students were also hiding.
Waymon said she was so overcome by fear that initially she couldn't even run.
"I got up and tried to run, but I fell," she said. She saw only blackness. "I heard someone hit the ground. It was so close to me."
Waymon got up and ran more than a mile to a McDonald's.
It's illegal in Kentucky for anyone under the age of 18 to possess a gun with a few exceptions, such as while attending a firearms safety course or while hunting. And the school conducts active shooter training.
Still, Ligon said she and other parents are now worried about the safety of their children. Some parents are considering home-schooling, and others, like Ligon, are considering holding their kids out until metal detectors are installed.
The school didn’t alert parents until after 9 a.m., Ligon said. She learned of the shooting from her eldest son, who called because he couldn’t find his brother amid the panic. She said she understands why schools can’t send an immediate alert, but she expected something sooner.
“What happens to the parents that work in Paducah or Murray or Mayfield and they hear about it on the news?” she asked.
Contributing: The Associated Press; Thomas Novelly, Erica Brechtelsbauer, Andy Wolfson and Darcy Costello, (Louisville, Ky.) Courier-Journal; Natalie Neysa Alund and Natalie Allison, The Tennessean. Mark Hicks of The (Clarksville, Tenn.) Leaf-Chronicle and Jake Lowary of The Tennessean reported from Kentucky. John Bacon of USA TODAY reported from McLean, Va.

 Alyssa Edging, center, a student at McCracken County High School, embraces Erica Johnson, left, and Abigail Hicks, both juniors at Marshall County High School in Benton, Ky., following a prayer vigil at Paducah Tilghman High School in Paducah, Ky. on Jan. 24, 2018. The gathering was held to honor the victims of the Marshall County High School shooting on Tuesday. Ryan Hermens, The Paducah Sun via AP
