5 college students who owned the spotlight this election season
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 

John Kasich speaks at the annual New York State Republican Gala on April 14, 2016, in New York City. (Photo: Eduardo Munoz Alvarez, Getty Images)
Corrections and clarifications: A previous version of this article misidentified the university Sammie Clemmey attends.
Presidential candidate John Kasich stepped messily into a discussion of sexual assault on campuses on Friday when he advised women not to attend parties “where there is a lot of alcohol.” And it put him in an unusual position — grabbing the headlines away from GOP rivals Donald Trump and Ted Cruz.
But the person who got Kasich to go off script wasn’t an elected official with a national profile or a seasoned political journalist. In fact, she hasn’t even finished her first year of college. She’s also just the latest example of a student impacting the presidential election by pushing a candidate on a tough issue.
We spotlight five students who stepped into the national spotlight this year with bold questions.
1. Sammie Clemmey, St. Lawrence University, John Kasich’s stand on sexual assault
At a town hall in Watertown, N.Y., on Friday, the first-year student asked the Ohio governor how he could help her “feel safer and more secure regarding sexual violence, harassment and rape.”
His answer started out OK, though he seemed to indicate the issue was, well, kind of new.
“I spotted this not, not that long ago,” he said. “In our state, we think that when you enroll you ought to absolutely know that if something happens to you along the lines of sexual harassment or whatever you have a place to go where there is confidential reporting, where there this an ability for you to access a rape kit, where that is kept confidential but where it gives you the opportunity to be able to pursue justice. … I have two 16-year-old daughters and I don’t even like to think about it.”
Clemmey had a good retort: Yes, it’s “sad, but it’s something that I have to worry about.”
This is where Kasich took a controversial turn: “Don’t go to parties where there’s a lot of alcohol.”
Kasich’s comment drew ire from the Democratic National Committee and Ohio Democratic Party, whose spokeswoman called Kasich’s response “outrageous,” USA TODAY reported.
After the town hall, Kasich spokesman Rob Nichols said that only one person is responsible for sexual assault: the assailant.
2. Fernanda Herrera, Samford University: Former candidate Marco Rubio and undocumented immigrants
Fernanda Herrera, an undocumented student at the Homewood, Ala., school, has lived in the United States since she was a child. She shared her story on Feb. 27, 2016, at a forum sponsored by the conservative Yellowhammer News for Florida Sen. Rubio, then in the running for president, in hopes of highlighting the challenges facing millions of undocumented people living in the U.S.
Herrera went on to ask Rubio whether she would have a pathway to citizenship should he be elected. His answer reflected an issue that had dogged a candidate whose parents are Cuban immigrants.
Rubio expressed sympathy for people brought to the U.S. at a young age, but reiterated his proposal to President Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals policy, saying the process by which Obama implemented it violated the constitution.

Photo: Jack Gruber, USA TODAY
3. Chelsea Fine, University of Chicago: Bernie Sanders’ Jewish faith
If elected, Sanders would be the country’s first Jewish president — not that you would know it. He rarely mentions his faith on the stump.
Chelsea Fine, a University of Chicago senior, asked Sanders to disclose how his heritage affects his approach to politics during a Feb. 25, 2016, presidential town hall there.
Sanders shared a story about members of his father’s family, who died in the Holocaust, and growing up among Holocaust survivors.
“I’m proud to be Jewish and I’m proud of my heritage,” Sanders told Fine.
Fine afterwards told the Forward she hoped her question would spark a wider conversation on the topic but that “it was nice to hear a more personal response from him.” 
4. Brett Rosengren, Drake Univesrity: Hillary Clinton’s favorite president
For most presidential candidates, listing their favorite past president is a pretty straightforward exercise.
But when sophomore Brett Rosengren posed the question to former secretary of State Hillary Clinton at a CNN town hall on Jan. 25, her obvious choices (should have) included her former boss, President Obama, and her husband, former president Bill Clinton.
But Clinton played it for laughs.
“Sorry, President Obama; sorry, Bill,” she quipped amid chuckles from the audience. “Abraham Lincoln.”
Rosengren’s time in the spotlight was extended slightly after accusations emerged that his question was planted by CNN, but the student later defended himself.
5. Joe Choe, Harvard: Donald Trump and South Korea
When Harvard junior Joe Choe asked Trump to address his claim that South Korea does not pay the U.S. for the military support it provides the country — which Politifact found to be false — the question was overshadowed by another controversial statement: Trump’s response.
The businessman, speaking at the No Labels Problem Solver Convention in New Hampshire in October, 2015, asked Choe if he was from South Korea, sparking outrage that the candidate jumped to conclusions about the student’s nationality based on his ethnicity.
“I’m not,” Choe responded. “I was born in Texas, raised in Colorado.”
“I don’t care who you are, whether you’re the prime minister or Donald Trump if you say something factually wrong or do something factually wrong, I’ll call you out on it,” Choe later told NPR. 
Colin Diersing is a Harvard University student and a USA TODAY College correspondent.
