New Hall of Famer Larry "Chipper" Jones was also a Hall of Fame troll
By January 24, 2018 6:46 pm  Follow @ogtedberg  
 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 24, 2018 6:46 pm  Follow @ogtedberg  
During the long and productive Major League career that earned him first-ballot Hall of Fame honors, longtime Atlanta Braves star Larry “Chipper” Jones clubbed 468 homers, batted over .300, and got on-base at a .401 clip. He beat up on most pitchers he faced, so he beat up on most teams.
But Jones enjoyed many of his very best performances in games against the New York Mets, the Braves’ primary divisional rival for long stretches of his big-league tenure. With the exception of teammate John Rocker, Jones was about the most hated opposing player the borough of Queens has ever known, and hit 19 career home runs at the Mets’ old home, Shea Stadium — six more than he did at any other road park.
And Jones, in one of professional sports’ truly awesome heel moves, found a way to troll Mets fans beyond his contributions on the field: In 2004, after he had already hit 17 homers at the stadium, he gave his son the name Shea.
He named his son Shea. It’s so good.
And lest anyone think he didn’t know what he was doing, here’s this, from a 2004 ESPN.com news article:
“I love playing there,” Jones said. “Check the numbers.”…
The couple had planned to name the child Shea whether it was a boy or girl, Jones said.
He doubled down in a 2008 Daily News article before the stadium closed following that season:
And while he hopes to continue the now-affectionate rivalry with Mets fans into Citi Field next season, he is sorry to see the closing of his “home away from home.” He said he will be among the first to purchase seats from the stadium when they go on sale on the Mets’ Web site Monday morning at 9.
“I am hoping to get a seat with a number 10 on it, ” Jones said, referring to his jersey number. “I’d also like to get something blue and orange and something that says Shea Stadium on it.
“I have a corner in my basement, my sanctuary, for all my Shea memorabilia.”…
“We both liked the name and it just seemed the perfect name,” he said. “It was just right to name him after this place.”
In 2012, Jones told the New York Times that he and his wife just liked the name and he would have named his son Shea even if he played in the American League for his whole career. To his credit, in that article and in various other forums, he also discussed how moved he was by the ceremonies at Shea Stadium during the Mets’ first game back after the 9/11 attacks.
