Captain America's cinematic comeback - USATODAY.com
Here we go again, Chris Evans thought.

By Jay Maidment, Paramount Pictures and Marvel Entertainment
 All that's missing is that mighty shield: Chris Evans has the titular role in Captain America: The First Avenger , in theaters Friday.
EnlargeClose
By Jay Maidment, Paramount Pictures and Marvel Entertainment
All that's missing is that mighty shield: Chris Evans has the titular role in Captain America: The First Avenger , in theaters Friday.
He had donned a superhero suit before, a leotard speckled with dots and cameras to make his body appear engulfed in flames for Fantastic Four and Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer. He may have been the coolest on-screen effect of the films (besides Jessica Alba's body), but he felt a little silly off-screen.
Now he was in the grandaddy suit, and compared with his previous getup, it was as heavy as lead. Captain America's outfit doesn't leave much in the room of breathability or peripheral vision. And some of his shields were cast iron, weighing upward of 15 pounds.
But when he first walked in costume onto the set of Captain America: The First Avenger, which opens Friday, Evans noticed a reaction that was far different from the one that had greeted his earlier heroes. Crewmembers, some of them in their 50s, stepped from behind cameras and rigs to see the outfit. Some touched the helmet, others the single star on the chest. Some asked to hold the shield.
"I'd always known that comic books have years and years of literary history," says Evans, 30, who plays super-soldier Steve Rogers. "But when you see (the suit), see how people react to it, you realize some of this is truly iconic."
Whether iconoclasm can turn around the fates of cinematic superheroes is another tale.
This was to be the summer of the superhero, with four crime fighters — Thor, X-Men, Green Lantern and Captain America — set to usher in a new era of comic-book film domination.
And while Thor made a respectable $180 million, crusaders have stumbled of late. None of the movies has taken in less than $100 million (often enough to justify a sequel), but none has made back its production budget, either. X-Men, which had a budget of $160 million, has taken in $144 million. Green Lantern, which cost about $200 million, has earned $113 million.
Forecasts vary for the $140 million Captain America, though the recent slowdown at the box office has some analysts lowering their expectations. Originally thought to be a shoo-in for a $50-million-plus debut, some analysts say Paramount should be happy with something in the mid-$40 million range.
"I think studios are discovering this is a harder genre to sell than they thought," says Jeff Bock of theater tracking firm Exhibitor Relations.
"It's not enough just to have a B- or C-list hero on the marquee and think the movie will do well," Bock says. "The superhero movies that worked were ones with top-caliber actors in the role of a lifetime. That's lightning in a bottle. You can't just reproduce it."
Still, our World War II hero has a few things going for him. His is the only superhero film set in the 1940s, the decade of his actual creation. The others from this summer were set in the present day or the Kennedy era.
And no comic-book movie could be more topical. Nationalism is running high in the wake of Osama bin Laden's death, though anti-U.S. sentiment over the wars and the U.S. role in Libya have heightened tension elsewhere.
"This is going to be a fascinating one to watch," Bock says. "He's relevant, but not everyone sees Captain America the same way around the world."
Character an early '40s hit
How people have seen him in America hasn't always been consistent. The captain made his debut in 1941 in response to Hitler and World War II. Writer Joe Simon was to name his invincible soldier Super American. But Simon decided there were too many "supers" in the comic-book world, and he and co-creator Jack Kirby called him Captain America.
"Hitler came first," Simon says of the inspiration. "He was the perfect super-villain back in 1940, and our job was to come up with a hero to fight him. The costume came to me while I was on a Fifth Avenue bus (in New York), and when I showed the sketch to Jack, he was so excited we pulled together the entire first issue before we even showed it to anyone."
When they did, the book was an immediate hit. Often illustrated with the hero fighting the Axis powers of World War II, Captain America became Timely Comics' most popular title. The look, Simon recalls, propelled the popularity.
"We designed him to be the perfect representation of the red, white and blue," Simon, 97, says. "The original shield came from my love of the Knights of the Round Table."
Since its sale to Marvel Comics, Captain America has sold more than 200 million copies in 76 countries
But Simon doubted he had a comic for his own nation's readers in the late 1940s, after the war ended and politics became subsumed by the Cold War. The comic was canceled in 1954, when Simon and Kirby collaborated on the acclaimed but short-lived comic book Fighting American, about a communist-punching super-soldier who draped himself in the flag.
He considered Marvel's attempts to resuscitate Captain America in the mid-1950s to be too newfangled.
"A 1950s attempt by Marvel to bring it back was a failure — Jack and I did a far better job with our Fighting American superhero. It wasn't until the 1960s, when Kirby went back to the Captain America, that he became popular again."
Today, he says, "the world is a much more dangerous place than it was during World War II. We all need a hero like Captain America, more than ever. I think that's why he's getting so much attention again."
And it looked for a while as if Captain America could be an early Hollywood star. He got a 1944 movie, a 1966 TV series and a 1990 movie reboot starring Matthew Salinger. 
But nothing resonated, and executives tinkered with updating the Captain's weapons, suit and love interests. Scripts bounced around, but "it was only when they went back to the original material that they got it right," says Simon, who still writes comics for Titan Entertainment. "The movie is based on our origin story, and this seems to be the one that's going to work."
At first, Evans said no
It certainly has the roots of the character down pat. The film offers plenty of flags and Uncle Sams, though director Joe Johnston says he "didn't want this to be a propaganda tool. You still have to make a movie they're going to want to see in Turkmenistan. To do that, you have to make a movie with a good story, not necessarily with a comic book at its heart."
For his part, Evans didn't even want another comic-book movie. He initially turned down the role.
Though both Fantastic Four movies did north of $130 million, Evans was part of a team that included Alba, Michael Chiklis and Ioan Gruffudd. Evans, 30, felt more comfortable as "one of the guys," he says. But after diving into about 50 Captain America comic books (he was never much of a fan), he says he "did a 180."
"Back then, it was a group of people drifting into uncharted waters," Evans says. "Now, there's no one to share the responsibility. I said no at first because the roles can get so big. You can lose some privacy if the movie takes off."
How well it takes off may be determined by real-world events, analysts say. The death of bin Laden could stir nationalism in moviegoers. But experts also warn that dated movies can face uphill climbs at the box office. The only recent World War II success was Quentin Tarantino's Inglourious Basterds, which earned $121 million.
Bock of Exhibitor Relations wonders whether filmmakers should have moved the other way chronologically. He notes that retro action films like 2004's SkyCaptain and the Worldof Tomorrow ($38 million) and 2007's Southland Tales ($275,000) were bombs.
"The biggest risk they took was in not updating him," Bock says. "It would have been easy enough to bring Nazis into the present day."
But Johnston says the time was right to put the boys back in historic action — and turn a boy into a man.
The film's signature effect — the hormonal explosion of a 90-pound Steve Rogers into a hulking super-soldier — uses some of the same technology as The Curious Case of Benjamin Button. Johnston took images of Evans' face and body, then digitally removed wrinkles and pounds. While Brad Pitt's face was superimposed on a shorter man for Button, Evans' face was stitched to a computer version of Evans' skinny teenage body.
"We had great body doubles," Johnston says. "But nothing came close to Chris' face and body. And when you see it on screen, it's mind-blowing."
But the minds worth blowing are fans'. Jim Littler, creator of comicbookmovie.com, says that Hollywood "is batting 50/50, with about half of the comic book movies being accepted, and half being panned."
Evans believes expanding the fan base is the key to pleasing that base.
"I'm not sure how relatable all comic book heroes are to people," Evans says. "But the thing about Captain America, he represents us. He represents what we want to be."
For more information about reprints & permissions, visit our FAQ's. To report corrections and clarifications, contact Standards Editor Brent Jones. For publication consideration in the newspaper, send comments to letters@usatoday.com. Include name, phone number, city and state for verification. To view our corrections, go to corrections.usatoday.com.
Posted | Updated 

We've updated the Conversation Guidelines. Changes include a brief review of the moderation process and an explanation on how to use the "Report Abuse" button. Read more.
Advertisement
Most Popular E-mail Newsletter

Sign up to get:
Top viewed stories, photo galleries and community posts of the day
Most popular right now:
