Yes, we're open!
Shutdown, we hardly knew ya
Perhaps it's more accurate to say the federal government took a long weekend. The Senate reached a compromise Monday to end the 3-day-old government shutdown. The House quickly passed the short-term budget deal, and President Trump will likely sign it. Trump tweeted earlier that he is glad the Democrats "have come to their senses," but the lawmakers vowed the fight over immigration is far from over. Senate Democrats helped scuttle a funding bill on Friday in part because it did not include provisions for DREAMers, undocumented immigrants brought to the U.S. as children. Trump — who was largely on the sidelines during the shutdown — said he would sign a long-term immigration deal "if and only if it’s good for our country." Without an immigration deal, Congress could face another shutdown in a few weeks. 
Let the barking begin! Underdog Eagles target 'pretty boy' Brady in Super Bowl
Moments after the Philadelphia Eagles completed their 38-7 demolition of the Minnesota Vikings in the NFC Championship game, offensive lineman Lane Johnson said he would love nothing more than to crush the New England Patriots in the Super Bowl and "dethrone" its "pretty boy" quarterback. That would be Tom Brady, who again showed off his all-time greatness by overcoming an injured hand to rally his team to a 24-20 win against the Jacksonville Jaguars. With Philadelphia's blowout, the Eagles and their enterprising fans earned the right to crow, but the matchup against New England is not going to be a picnic, especially with the game being played in hostile Minneapolis. But the Eagles are embracing their underdog role: Just take a look at the creepy masks they are wearing.
Under fire for mishandling a sexual abuse scandal, USA Gymnastics top leadership resigns
The three highest-ranking members of USA Gymnastics’ board of directors — chairman Paul Parilla, vice chairman Jay Binder and treasurer Bitsy Kelley — submitted their resignations effective immediately Monday after days of withering public criticism by women who accused former doctor Larry Nassar of sexual abuse. Critics accused USA Gymnastics’ leadership of being indifferent and slow to make changes to protect young gymnasts in the future. The remaining board members, including five athlete representatives, will select an interim chairman until a permanent replacement is found.
50th anniversary: USA TODAY Network looks at how 1968 transformed a nation
The year forever changed the world. By midnight Dec. 31, 1968, Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert Kennedy were dead, and Richard Nixon had won the presidential election. U.S. Olympians had raised their fists in protest of racial discrimination during a medal ceremony, and the Vietnam War casualty counts and demonstrations filled the nightly news. And Apollo 8 astronauts became the first humans to orbit the moon. These moments defined 1968. In a year-long series, USA TODAY Network will peel back the layers of the turbulent year to reveal how 1968 shaped who we are. 
Amazon Go is a go
Walk into a store. Grab what you want. Walk out. Amazon may have started a new era in shopping when it opened a Seattle grocery store Monday that lets you skip the checkout line, courtesy of hundreds of cameras and sensors, along with a new Amazon app. Critics point out that fewer checkout clerks mean fewer jobs. And what happens to candy, gum, battery, and tabloid magazine sales when customers no longer have to wait in line? How will shoppers get local gossip without the checkout clerks? There's no app for that.
This is a compilation of stories from across USA TODAY.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2Dzbbvl
