Actress Allison Janney shares her tips for visiting Washington, D.C.
3 Shares 




Allison Janney grew to love Washington, D.C., while she portrayed C.J. Cregg, the press secretary and chief of staff to the president on the NBC show The West Wing.
She visited the nation’s capital four times a year while filming the show. She has since moved on to star in the TV hit comedy Mom and is earning Oscar buzz for her turn as Tonya Harding’s mother in the movie I, Tonya. But she still has a sweet spot for D.C. and was recently named a curator for Rosewood Washington D.C., a luxury hotel in Georgetown.
“Working on a show like The West Wing, I felt like that was a passport to D.C.,” she says. “We showed the Camelot version of what goes on in Washington, and people were really grateful for what we were doing. I always felt I had a sense of belonging.”
As a Rosewood curator, Janney, who has earned several Emmys, shares her tips for touring D.C.
“If I had to describe Washington in three words, I would say history, beauty and elegance,” she says. “It has a very European feel to it, so you can stay right here in the States and get a European flavor from the beauty of L’Enfant’s design for the city.”

Here are some of her favorite things to do in the nation’s capital:
Visit the monuments at night: Janney loves touring the National Mall when the crowds thin at night. “It’s spectacular, the way they’re lit, and the history. It’s a must,” she says.
Tour the White House and the Capitol: Regardless of your political leanings, the White House is still an iconic building. And the Capitol’s dome is finally visible once again after two years of being hidden under scaffolding during a multi-million dollar renovation.
Shop on M Street in Georgetown: The shopping district, lined with 19th century buildings, has shops ranging from well-known chains to one-of-a-kind boutiques. Janney enjoys strolling the area and rounding out an afternoon of shopping with a visit to Georgetown University’s campus.
Stroll through Shaw: This is one of D.C.’s up-and-coming neighborhoods and has become a go-to-spot for shopping, dining and drinking. Janney likes it for its “warm, intimate feel.”
Dine at world-class restaurants: Washington’s food scene has become one of the best in the USA, with celebrity chefs such as Jose Andres, Mike Isabella, Spike Mendelsohn, Bryan Voltaggio, and Kwame Onwuachi opening restaurants in the city and its suburbs. Janney enjoys heading out for a meal in the city at restaurants such as Rose’s Luxury by chef Aaron Silverman and Komi, a prix-fixe Mediterranean eatery. “It’s my go to for special occasions,” Janney says.
Visit the city’s many museums: D.C. is home to more than 70 museums. Janney has two favorites: The Phillips Collection with its American and European modern art and The National Portrait Gallery. “It’s home to great Americana and has an enclosed terrace that’s a perfect spot for lunch,” she says.
Catch a show at the Kennedy Center: Janney received her Actors’ Equity card for her role opposite Richard Thomas in the play Citizen Tom Paine at The Kennedy Center. “It was an extraordinary time in my life,” she recalls. In 2018, the center will offer programs such as the centennial celebrations of Leonard Bernstein and Ingmar Bergman. Broadway hits An American in Paris and Hamilton will debut in the new year.

 The Museum of the Bible has opened in Southwest D.C. Alan Karchmer
