'True Blood' star Nelsan Ellis dies at 39
CLOSE

 Nelsan Ellis, the actor known for his role of Lafayette on the HBO series True Blood, died at the age of 39 Time

Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this report gave an incorrect title for the James Brown biopic Get on Up.
Nelsan Ellis, who played sassy short-order cook Lafayette Reynolds on HBO's True Blood, has died at 39 of complications from heart failure.
His manager, Emily Gerson Saines, confirmed his death on Saturday to USA TODAY. 
"He was a great talent, and his words and presence will be forever missed," she said in a statement.
While he also had roles on CBS' Elementary and worked in films like The Help, Secretariat, the James Brown biopic Get on Up  and The Soloist, to fans of True Blood, he will always be Lafayette.
The Illinois-born actor so impressed the producers and fans of the HBO supernatural drama with his performance that the TV version of Lafayette escaped the early death the character was dealt in Charlaine Harris' books. 
"A great talent gone too soon," Harris lamented on Twitter. "Such a shock."
I am so sad about the death of Nelsan Ellis, a great talent gone too soon. Such a shock. 💔
— Charlaine Harris (@RealCharlaine) July 8, 2017
Alan Ball, who adapted her novels, and directed many episodes of the show, said in a statement, "Nelsan was a singular talent whose creativity never ceased to amaze me. Working with him was a privilege."
True Blood marked Ellis' second HBO project. He also appeared in 2005's Emmy-winning Warm Springs, in which his character tended to the polio-stricken Franklin Delano Roosevelt (Kenneth Branagh). 
The network issued a statement noting, "Nelsan was a long-time member of the HBO family whose groundbreaking portrayal of Lafayette will be remembered fondly within the overall legacy of True Blood. Nelsan will be dearly missed by his fans and all of us at HBO."
The True Blood family mourned him on Twitter Saturday.
"It was an utter privilege to work with the phenomenally talented and deeply kind soul .@
OfficialNelsan," wrote Anna Paquin, whose waitress character, Sookie Stackhouse, was close with Ellis' cook. "I'm devastated by his untimely death."
It was an utter privilege to work with the phenomenally talented and deeply kind soul .@OfficialNelsan I'm devastated by his untimely death. pic.twitter.com/If17csduHz
— Anna Paquin (@AnnaPaquin) July 8, 2017
"Nelsan Ellis was truly remarkable," recalled Paquin's husband, Stephen Moyer, who played vampire Bill Compton. "A brilliant, charismatic, intelligent, soulful, wonderful dude. this is just completely tragic."
Nelsan Ellis was truly remarkable. A brilliant, charismatic, intelligent, soulful, wonderful dude. this is just completely tragic.
— Stephen Moyer (@smoyer) July 8, 2017
"One of the sweetest most talented men I've ever met," wrote Kristin Bauer van Straten, who played vampire Pam, whose character once held his hostage. "A terrible loss for all of us."
A post shared by Kristin Bauer (@kristinbauer) on Jul 8, 2017 at 12:58pm PDT
Sam Trammell, who played his boss at Merlotte's, wrote, "I don't know if I've ever seen the level of humility and kindness that came with the magnificent talent that Nelsan Ellis had."
I don't know if I've ever seen the level of humility and kindness that came with the Magnificent Talent that Nelsan Ellis had. Miss u friend
— Sam Trammell (@SamTrammell) July 8, 2017
"So blessed to share the screen with you, you beautiful man," wrote Todd Lowe, who played Terry Bellefleur, an Iraq vet who worked alongside Lafayette and helped him cope with PTSD.

"Crushed today by the loss of my friend and castmate Nelsan Ellis," wrote Joe Manganiello, who played werewolf Alcide. "He was a wonderful person, a pioneer, and a one of a kind artist."

Kevin Alejandro, who came on as Lafayette's boyfriend Jesus midway through the series, said he was "speechless" and '"heartbroken."

"I was in complete awe of your talent and so honored to have known your kindness," wrote Anna Camp, who broke out in a recurring role as an anti-vampire, religious fundamentalist Christian during Season 2 and returned in the final season.
My heart is broken today over the loss of @OfficialNelsan I was in complete awe of your talent and so honored to have known your kindness.
— Anna Camp (@TheRealAnnaCamp) July 8, 2017

 Nelsan Ellis' 'True Blood' character, Lafayette Reynolds, was, without a doubt, the most stylish person to ever step foot in Merlotte's Bar & Grill. The screen will be considerably less interesting without the presence of the actor, who died Saturday at age 39 from complications from heart failure. Click forward to see more photos from his career. John P. Johnson, HBO
