Super Bowl’s first black quarterback defends Cam Newton
CLOSE

 USA TODAY Sports' Lindsay H. Jones examines what the Panthers need to do to beat the Broncos. USA TODAY Sports

Correction/clarification: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated the number of black quarterbacks that have started the Super Bowl.
When Cam Newton told reporters Wednesday, “I’m an African-American quarterback that may scare a lot of people because they haven’t seen nothing they can compare me to,” a former NFL quarterback felt a special kinship.
“They probably look at Cam almost like they look at me,’’ Doug Williams told USA TODAY Sports, and with a chuckle he added, “I wish I was the athlete Cam is.”
Williams didn’t dance on the field, strike Superman poses or dazzle anyone with his running ability the way Newton does for the Super Bowl-bound Carolina Panthers. But in 1988, Williams became the first black quarterback to play in the Super Bowl. He also won the MVP award that day when he led the Washington Redskins to a 42-10 victory against the Denver Broncos while throwing for 340 yards and four touchdowns on 18-for-29 passing.

Almost three decades later, Newton is set to become only the sixth African-American quarterback in 50 years to start in the Super Bowl. The other five are Russell Wilson of the Seattle Seahawks, Colin Kaepernick of the San Francisco 49ers, retired Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb, Steve McNair of the Tennessee Titans and Williams, who is well aware that Newton cited race as a reason Newton thinks he’s been criticized so harshly this season.
“I’m not going to be the one who says what my thinking is, because sometimes it don’t matter what I think,” Williams said. “It ain’t going to matter what he thinks. Because at the end of the day you’ve got a lot of people denying (racism is behind the criticism of Newton), that that’s not true. Even if it’s true, they’re going to deny it.
CLOSE

 Super Bowl 50 is almost here, and Ad Meter 50 for 50th, sponsored by Adobe, is narrowing down the greatest big game commercials of the past 50 years. USA TODAY Sports
“I think Cam is mature enough, he knows what he’s up against. He knows what he has to deal with. And he’s got a daddy, he’s got grandparents, he’s got older people who’ve lived in this world long enough to understand why a lot of things happen to certain people. He’s got a right to understand that (race) could be one of the problems.”
Though Williams won’t offer his opinions about whether racism has fueled criticism of Newton, he’s offered an unfiltered assessment of Newton.

“Let’s be real.” Williams said. “This kid has had an unbelievable year. He has his own personality. … I don’t see anything arrogant about Cam Newton. And I think a lot of people would agree with that. The kid is having fun. Ain’t nothing wrong with having fun.
"The team loves him. The fans love him. And the city loves him. At the end of the day, for Cam Newton, that’s the most important thing to him.
“I don’t think he spends a lot of time with what people think about him if it’s not positive. I think what he’s shown in Charlotte and a lot of other places is that he's a pretty good kid.''
For the record, Williams said he needed instruction from his 7- and 10-year-old daughters before he learned how to properly “dab,” the name of Newton’s signature dance.
“I can do it now,’’ Williams said. “But I wouldn’t do it publicly.”
PHOTOS: One great photo from every Super Bowl in history

 Super Bowl I (Packers 35, Chiefs 10): Green Bay Packers wide receiver Max McGee makes a juggling touchdown catch during the first Super Bowl. Packers quarterback Bart Starr was named MVP. AP File
