Snowden out of sight; Ecuador asks U.S. about asylum
CLOSE

 The whereabouts of Edward Snowden, the former National Security Agency contractor wanted by the United States for revealing highly classified surveillance programs, remained unclear Wednesday. AP

MOSCOW — NSA leaker Edward Snowden remained in hiding Wednesday though a hint of his escape plans emerged when the Ecuadorean Embassy asked the United States why it should not grant him political asylum.
Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport was full of media looking for Snowden, the subject of an extradition request by the United States on a charge of espionage.
Russian President Vladimir Putin said Snowden has been in the airport since his arrival from Hong Kong on Sunday. He said Snowden is in a transit area of the airport that is not technically Russian soil, so Russia cannot honor the U.S. extradition request.
The government of Ecuador said Wednesday it is considering granting asylum to Snowden and has asked the United States to submit any objections in writing.
Snowden's request will be "reviewed responsibly," said Efrain Baus, the deputy chief of mission at Ecuador's Embassy in Washington. "The government of Ecuador has requested that the U.S. submit its position regarding this applicant in writing so that it can be taken into consideration as part of our thorough review process."
Before leaving Hong Kong, Snowden was given "a refugee document of passage" by Ecuadorean diplomats, according to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, who is coordinating assistance for Snowden from the Ecuadorean Embassy in London. Assange himself is hiding in the embassy to avoid extradition to Sweden for questioning on rape accusations against him.
In a statement posted to the embassy website, Baus said Ecuador receives many asylum requests each year and the legal basis for each request "must be rigorously established" in accordance with the Ecuadorean constitution, the international legal framework and human rights.
RIA Novosti, a Russian news agency, reported that Snowden had booked two tickets for flights from Moscow to Havana on June 24 and 25 but did not board either flight. If he has not been able to extend his transit visa — assuming he has one and that it is valid for three days — it may be about to expire.
It is not clear what his legal travel status would be if his three-day transit visa granted by Russia expired. The United States has revoked his passport and wants Russia to honor an extradition request.
Former ambassador to the United Nations John Bolton said Putin's claim that Snowden did not technically cross into Russia is preposterous. Bolton, who served under President George W. Bush, said Snowden entered Russia as soon as his plane crossed Russian airspace.
"Russia could've pulled him off the plane when he arrived," Bolton told Fox News.
He said the only reason Russia is allowing him to remain is so it can gain full access to the computer records Snowden says he stole from his former contractor job for the National Security Agency, records he says detail secret NSA surveillance programs and their targets. Snowden claims he stole the records because the programs are illegal and improper.
The White House says the programs scoured phone calls and websites searching for patterns that would lead to communication among terrorists. It says that the programs are legal and overseen by the courts and Congress and that they have successfully disrupted terrorist plots.
"Cancelling Snowden's passport and bullying intermediary countries may keep Snowden permanently in Russia. Not the brightest bunch at State," WikiLeaks said on its Twitter feed late Tuesday.
Contributing: Kim Hjelmgaard in London.
CONNECTTWEET 3 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/12jp1bi
