ABC's 'Taking the Stage' special marks a tribute to black art
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 President Obama speaks at the opening of the Smithsonian's National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington, D.C., on Sept. 24. The opening ceremonies of the 400,000-square-foot museum attracted thousands. Jim Lo Scalzo, European Pressphoto Agency
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay

Last SlideNext Slide

Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this post misidentified the choir singing America the Beautiful.
"Although I should begin by saying, 'Good evening, everyone,' what I’d really like to say is, 'Hallelujah!'"
Hailing the crowd at Washington’s John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Oprah Winfrey looked joyous — and fittingly so. The spirit inside the center — the site for ABC’s Taking the Stage: African American Music and Stories That Changed America special, airing Thursday (9 ET/PT) — was one of affirmation. Taped last September in honor of the Smithsonian’s new National Museum of African American History and Culture, the two-hour special reflects on our nation’s history through the lens of the black experience, paying homage to African Americans' cultural impact through dance, spoken word and musical performances.
"We’re here to celebrate," Winfrey says. "From our first days here as African Americans, we’ve left a record of how we felt and how we moved through life, from the spiritual side to the sexy side, life in all of its colors. Tonight is about music and it’s about memories and it’s about imagination and tonight is about taking the stage and changing America."
From an upper perch, President Obama — the man who ran his campaign on that change — looked on.

A-list stars include presenters Angela Bassett, Dave Chappelle, Tom Hanks, Samuel L. Jackson, Quincy Jones (also a producer, with Don Mischer), Janelle Monáe and Will Smith. And the special features performances by Mary J. Blige, Christina Aguilera, , Herbie Hancock, Gladys Knight, John Legend, Ne-Yo, Usher and Stevie Wonder, among others.

Blige gave a poignant performance of My Country, 'Tis of Thee, a tribute to contralto Marian Anderson, who changed the lyrics from "of thee I sing" to "to thee we sing" before a desegregated crowd of 75,000 during her 1939 Lincoln Memorial performance.
Later, the West Point Glee Club sang America the Beautiful as former secretary of State Colin Powell saluted seven surviving Tuskegee Airmen. And, at one point, Usher hit the stage and called the crowd to Say It Loud — I’m Black and I’m Proud.
Between performances were archived footage and photos of artifacts from the museum's collection, from iron shackles to Muhammad Ali’s boxing gloves, evocative of the legacy of black tragedy and triumph.

The special ends on a cautiously hopeful note, with Wonder reminding the audience of the power of performance to advance liberation. "Tonight, we make history," he says. "Tomorrow, our children will make history, at least those who survive. We are a story of … standing up and standing together. Remember for our future, do not forget today and remember still love’s in need of love today."
"Let’s get it," he said before launching into the night’s final tunes: Love’s in Need of Love Today and Higher Ground. 

CONNECTTWEET 3 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2ikBWbK
