CNN Profiles - Lynda Kinkade - Anchor - CNN
Lynda Kinkade
Anchor
Lynda Kinkade is an anchor for CNN International based at the network's headquarters in Atlanta. She currently anchors 'CNN Newsroom' and weekend editions of 'International Desk,' and can also be seen filling in on weekday programs like 'CNN Today.'
Full Bio
About 
Lynda Kinkade is an anchor for CNN International based at the network's headquarters in Atlanta. She can be seen over the weekends across Europe, Africa and the Middle East during the day and in the late evening in Australia and Asia. She currently anchors 'CNN Newsroom' and weekend editions of 'International Desk,' and can also be seen filling in on weekday programs like 'CNN Today.'
She has anchored a number of breaking news stories including the cyberattack against Sony; the crisis in Eastern Ukraine; the shootings at Canada's National War Memorial and Parliament; the search for missing Malaysia Airlines Flight 370; the hostage negotiations by ISIS in Syria and Iraq; and the overthrow of Yemen's government.
Before joining CNNI, Kinkade worked for Seven Network Australia, most recently as a freelance correspondent from New York where she filed reports on the Polar Vortex, the push to legalize marijuana, Boeing's first space taxi, the crash of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 and the spread of the Ebola virus. She had previously worked in Melbourne for five years on the network's national public affairs show Today Tonight, reporting on a number of national and international stories including the deadly Black Saturday Bushfires; the Australian Open; and the G'Day USA Tourism campaign from Los Angeles, California. 
Prior to Seven Network Australia, Kinkade spent four years at Nine Network Australia working across the assignment desk, anchor desk and ultimately as a reporter for the network's National Nine News show in Sydney.
She has interviewed a variety of celebrities and newsmakers including former Australian Prime Ministers John Howard and Kevin Rudd, Russell Crowe, Cate Blanchett, former U.S. Vice President Al Gore, John Travolta and Sylvester Stallone. 
Kinkade's career started while she was still in university, working for free on weekends at the major commercial networks and local newspapers in Sydney. In her second year of study she was hired by the Seven Network as their political researcher and her research was published for use during the NSW State Election in 2003. After graduation she cut her teeth as a field reporter for regional television station NBN News. 
Beyond her role as a journalist, Kinkade has volunteered her time to moderate numerous forums, MC events and fundraise for organizations including the USA Brain Tumor Alliance, Heartkids NSW, the Epworth Hospital and the Sydney Symphony.
A native of Australia, Kinkade graduated from the University of Technology in Sydney with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Communication (Journalism) with a distinction average.
