Ask the Captain: Can the 747 be saved?
Flight engineer Lance Pruitt looks at notes at his station on the flight deck of one of the last airworthy Boeing 747-200s, seen in Seattle on April 20, 2017. The aircraft belonging to cargo carrier Kalitta Air is headed for retirement. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
 Capt. Scott Jaykl begins to shut down the airplane, one of the last Boeing 747-200s, seen here in Seattle after a flight on April 20, 2017. The aircraft belonging to cargo carrier Kalitta Air is headed for retirement. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
Last SlideNext Slide

Question: Can the 747 be saved? It's sad to see the most beautiful and iconic passenger plane ever built being retired. What has accounted for its demise? Could they not attach new, more efficient engines to newer models and keep her flying? What about incorporating a new wing design?
— submitted by reader Anthony Carron, Santa Barbara, Calif.
Answer: The 747 will remain in service in cargo operations for several more years. In passenger service, it has been overtaken economically. The new fuel-efficient twins cost so much less to operate that the 747 cannot compete.
The 747 entered service in 1969 as one of the technological marvels of the day. In the 48 years since it has remained iconic. Nearly 50 years in service is a remarkable feat for any airplane. 
 This trend will continue. 

 With a fresh coat of paint, the first Boeing 747 shines even under the cloudy Seattle skies at the Museum of Flight on Oct. 18, 2014. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren for USA TODAY
 Newlyweds Heidi and Mal Muir take their first selfie as a married couple aboard the first Boeing 747 at the Museum of Flight on Oct. 18, 2014.. The couple exchanged vows in front of the plane's iconic staircase. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren for USA TODAY
 People queue for the opportunity to board the first Boeing 747 ever created at the Museum of Flight on. The jet, seen here on Oct. 18, 2014, has been open to viewing on a few special occasions, but this marked the first time it was opened to the general public for regular viewing. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren for USA TODAy
 Brien Wygle (right), pilot of the first 747 flight in 1969, signs a Boeing 747-8 model at an event at the Museum of Flight on Oct. 18, 2014. The airplane's designer, Joe Sutter (left), looks on. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren for USA TODAY
Last SlideNext Slide
Q: I’ve read about the inevitable death of the 747 because it is too costly to operate a four-engine aircraft. Why can't engine manufacturers come up with an engine similar to what is on the more fuel-efficient aircraft — for example, producing a version of the engine that is on a 787 or a 777 — to fit and safely propel the 747? 
— Randy, Phoenix
A: The total thrust required is the key, not the number of engines. A 777 engine may be equal to two 747 engines, but the wing is not designed to take such a large engine in one place.
The 747 originally flew in 1969; in those days it took four engines to power it. Therefore, the design was centered on four engines. Since then, engine technology has improved, making more powerful engines common. However the design limitations remain for the 747. The 777, a twin-engine airplane, can fly almost as many people, almost as far as a 747, but it was designed 30 years later.
It may be possible to re-engine a 747 to a twin but I have not heard of an economical way.
 A Qantas Airbus A380 takes off from the airport in Sydney, Australia, on Aug. 25, 2017. Australia's Qantas unveiled plans for the world's longest non-stop commercial flight on August 25, 2017 calling it the "last frontier of global aviation", as it posted healthy annual net profits on the back of a strong domestic market. / AFP PHOTO / PETER PARKSPETER PARKS/AFP/Getty Images ORIG FILE ID: AFP_RT6DY AFP/Getty Images
Q: Can a Boeing 747 be converted to a military plane?
— Lai, Pennsylvania
A: The original design of the 747 included the ability to convert it to a military cargo airplane. The nose of these specially built freighters lifts up, allowing access for large cargo. Passenger 747s can be converted into troop carriers. During the Gulf War of 1990 many airliners flew troops to the Middle East. While they were not true military airplanes, they were an important addition to the Air Force’s transport capability.

 Boeing's Everett assembly line is one of the largest buildings in the world. Bike and pedestrian lanes act as thoroughfares through giant complex. Ben Mutzabaugh, USA TODAY
Q: Can you compare the current Boeing 747 to when they were first made?
— Morgan, New Zealand
A: The newest generation 747, the Dash 8, is much more fuel efficient and capable than the original 747 that flew in 1969. It can carry much more payload and fly a greater distance while burning less fuel. The new 747 is easier to fly and can land in lower visibility conditions than the original 747. The $300 million dollar plus price tag is much more expensive than the original 747.

 A trio of already retired MD-80s rest in the Roswell desert on Aug, 5, 2015. The airplanes are stored by American Airlines for spare parts. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, Special for USA TODAY
 Checking for items left behind, a ramp worker with American has a last look inside the belly of the jet before it leaves Dallas/Ft. Worth International Airport before its retirement flight on Aug. 5, 2015. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, Special for USA TODAY
Q: How many flaps does the Boeing 747 have on each wing? 
— sent via email 
A: This is a more complex question than it appears. The 747 has inboard and outboard trailing edge flaps that consist of three panels. Additionally there are Kruger flaps on the inboard section of the leading edge.

 Question: Can pilots really make up time in the air?    Michael Probst, AP
 Question: Can the 747 be saved? It's sad to see the most beautiful and iconic passenger plane ever built being retired. Answer: The 747 will remain in service in cargo operations for several more years. In passenger service, it has been overtaken economically. The new fuel-efficient twins cost so much less to operate that the 747 cannot compete.  This trend will continue. Justin Tallis, AFP/Getty Images
 Question: If a tire blows out on the runway, what is the normal course of action? Answer: Most modern airliners have more than a single tire on a landing gear. The tires are designed to take the load if the companion tire is compromised. If the pilots know a tire has failed during takeoff at low speed, they will abort the takeoff. At high speed they will go ahead and take off, then return to land for a safety inspection. If the tire fails during landing, a normal landing is conducted. Stephen Brashear, Getty Images
 Question: Are airplanes more likely to experience more turbulence during one season than another? Answer: Each season has challenges: Summer has thunderstorms and tropical storms. Autumn has late tropical storms (usually the quietest season). Winter has higher winds, blizzards and more clear air turbulence. Spring has fast-moving fronts and high winds, causing severe squall lines. Each of these events can cause turbulence.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Question: What do you miss most about being an airline pilot?  Getty Images/iStockphoto
  Answer: Some runways are more challenging due to the slope and humps.     Airport designers must make compromises for efficiency and cost. Joaquin Sarmiento, AFP/Getty Images
 Question: Can pilots change their route for a better view of an eclipse?     David Zalubowski, AP
  Answer: Some large airplanes have cameras installed in strategic places. They provide valuable information for taxiing and can be used in flight if necessary. The instruments provide pilots with a good indication of problems or system malfunctions.  Ted S. Warren, AP
 Question: How and why is fuel dumped from a flight?  This is done via valves in the wingtips that allow fuel to be pumped out and vaporized. The purpose of dumping fuel is to reduce the weight of the airplane. Most airplanes have a maximum takeoff weight that is higher than maximum landing weight.  LM Otero, AP
 Question: What is the highest altitude an airplane can fly? Answer: The highest commercial airliner altitude was 60,000 feet by Concorde. The highest military air-breathing engine airplane was the SR-71 — about 90,000 feet. The highest airliner flying today reaches 45,000 feet. The highest business jet flying today reaches 51,000 feet. Getty Images
 Question: When a baby is born in flight, what determines the nationality of the child?  Different countries treat births differently. In some cases, rules stipulate that where the baby is born, the nationality is offered or required. Other countries have the nationality of the parents as their rule. In some cases, the nationality of the airline can become the nationality of the baby.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Question: How does the evacuation test work? Answer: Manufacturers and airlines frequently demonstrate evacuations to regulators. This is done when a new airplane is certified or when an airline purchases a new airplane. The participants are not specially trained and represent a wide age range.  Half of the exits are blocked. The participants are not aware of which exits are blocked until the evacuation is started. Every occupant must be safely off the airplane within 90 seconds. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Question: How do pilots remember and then repeat all of the instructions from ATC? Answer: Listening and understanding radio calls from ATC is a learned skill. Pilots fly for many years, working with ATC. The more experienced crews fly into more complex airports.  Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Question: What happens when lightning strikes a plane? Answer: Lightning strikes will usually leave small burn marks or holes at the entry and exit point.  Occasionally, a static wick will be the victim of lightning exiting the airplane. Ethan Miller, Getty Images
 Question: I believe aircraft have de-icing mechanisms.     Consequently, ice must be completely removed from the airplane before takeoff.    Alexa Welch Edlund, Richmond Times-Dispatch via AP
 Question: The airlines are adding more seats to their planes. Are they jeopardizing passenger safety?   Ted S. Warren, AP
 Question: What is yaw, and how does it affect an airplane? Answer: Yaw is movement of the nose of the aircraft perpendicular to the wings (left or right).   The device that inputs this small rudder is known as the yaw damper. Carolyn Kaster, AP
 Question: I've flown on the Airbus 380 several times. It seems to me the taxi speed is slower than smaller equipment.  Or are there reasons, such as fuel-use and braking concerns, that make it taxi more slowly? Answer: The A380 is a very large airplane, which has a wingspan of more than 260 feet.  Consequently, A380 captains do tend to taxi more slowly. The weight of the airplane causes increased stopping distances.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
  Do you think narrow-body aircraft will be the future for international travel? Answer: It is possible that several airlines could begin flying A321LRs on trans-Atlantic routes. The airplane has the range to make the flight. The Boeing 757 has been used on less-traveled trans-Atlantic routes for many years. Both are single-aisle airplanes, also known as narrow-body aircraft.  The planes will not replace the wide-body aircraft flown between the large cities. There is growing discussion about low-cost trans-Atlantic airline service.  Ben Mutzabaugh, USA TODAY
 Question: Is over-reliance on automation increasing the number of commercial airline accidents? Answer: No, the number of accidents is decreasing.   Training has to include extensive use of automation and manual flying. Alexander Hassenstein, Getty Images
 Question: Can a larger aircraft land on a shorter than recommended runway in an emergency? Answer: Yes, it can be done. Every airplane has a required runway length due to the physics of decelerating. It is much shorter than many people realize.  Rob Griffith, AP
 Question: Where does my bag go when I check it?   Security screening of the bag occurs before loading to ensure the safety of the flight.  At your destination, the reverse occurs.  Patrick Semansky, AP
  It implies there may be more than one approach. Answer: It is a differentiation of the segments of the approach. There is an initial part of the approach and a final phase of the approach.  Justin Tallis, AFP/Getty Images
  Answer: Airplanes often fly domestic and overwater flights in the same day.  Returning from the overwater flights, it then flies other domestic legs.  Edouard H. R. Gluck, AP
  Why is that?  The sensation of “dropping” comes from the retraction of the flaps and slats. The rate of climb is reduced, causing it to feel like a descent. Josep Lago, AFP/Getty Images
 Question: Can you explain all the different lights on a commercial aircraft and their purpose?  Additionally there are landing lights to provide illumination of the runway during landing.  There are often lights that illuminate the wings so the pilots can inspect for ice build-up. The red flashing lights on the top and bottom are known as anti-collision lights. Many airplanes have bright flashing white lights called strobes making them easier to see. Comstock/Getty Images
 Question: How bad does turbulence have to be before we should be freaking out?? Answer: Unexpected turbulence is uncomfortable, but is not a safety risk to the airplane. Airplanes are designed for it. The last case of a turbulence-caused accident was in the 1960s in Japan. There are some similarities with a boat hitting a wave in water.   That sensation is caused by the vestibular system in your ears.  This is a normal reaction. Pilots have experienced this sensation many times and have no problem flying the airplane safely. Christophe Testi, Getty Images/Hemera
 Question: How were airport codes assigned?  ICAO uses a four-letter code, in which the first letter is the country code. The USA uses K for its code. The New York airports are KJFK for Kennedy, KLGA for LaGuardia and KEWR for Newark. These codes are used for the filing of flight plans and for air traffic control purposes. The IATA codes are used for ticketing and are three letters. Chicago O'Hare is ORD, London Heathrow is LHR, and London Gatwick is LGW. The IATA codes are used for baggage, too. Jason Kempin, Getty Images for #TackleEbola
 Question: Why is there sometimes no window next to my seat?   This area is strengthened, and the area where the window would normally be is solid. Jeremy Martin via AP
 Question: Do airplanes have a hard time taking off in hot weather? Answer: I would not say they have a hard time, but performance is definitely limited by the heat.   Rob Schumacher, The Arizona Republic
 Question: Is it safer to be on a smaller plane or larger one?  Regional airline-size airplanes have a somewhat higher accident rate than do larger airline jets. Turboprops have a higher accident rate than jets.  Aviation is the safest form of transportation. This makes it very hard to say that one airplane is significantly safer than another.  Mark Wilson, Getty Images
 Question: How long will supplemental oxygen last after the masks drop in an emergency? Answer: On typical airliners oxygen generators will last 10 to 14 minutes. That is more than enough time to descend to 10,000 feet or the lowest altitude above the terrain.  Getty Images Getty Images
 Question: Why does it take so long to open the exit door?   Ground crew members then begin to position the jet bridge, aligning it with the door.   This is the generic procedure for most jet airliners.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Question: How do runways get their names? Answer: The runway number is the approximate magnetic heading. As an example, runway 35 is pointing approximately 350 degrees magnetic. The opposite end of the runway is 17 or approximately 170 degrees magnetic.  Two runways pointed east are named 09 Left and 09 Right. The 09 indicate they are pointed 090, due east, and the left and right identify the parallels. When there are three runways, they use the same process but include a “Center” designation.    Digital Vision/Getty Images
  Answer: Computer security is taken very seriously.   Improving security is an ongoing effort by manufacturers, operators and the regulators. Mario Tama, Getty Images
  What's the difference?   FAA via AP
    Getty Images/iStockphoto
   Smaller airplanes (e.g. B737 and A320) do not need them as the flight crew can see the wingtips.  It has not been cost-effective to retrofit these airplanes with cameras. Jasper Colt, USA TODAY
  Is this true, and if so, why the difference?   Mario Tama, Getty Images
      Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Question: How do commercial airliners and military aircraft share the skies?  In addition, the military branches have special airspace they can use for training and maneuvers. Ian Hitchcock, Getty Images
 Question: How could a plane land at the wrong airport?     Modern airplanes have many wonderful navigation tools helping to avoid such events. Brett Deering, Getty Images
 Question: How do flight planners determine which aircraft to use on what route?  It is an art to keep the schedule running.  Brendan Smialowski, AFP/Getty Images
  Answer: The modern jet’s anti-skid system is very good.    This system has worked very well for many decades to ensure the safety of landing aircraft. Getty Images/iStockphoto
  How are these procedures done?  From very basic flight training, it is a skill that is taught and evaluated frequently. It is critical to keep the airplane aligned with the center line.  Pilots watch for drift during takeoff roll and apply rudder with the rudder pedals.  Rob Schumacher, The Arizona Republic
 Question: Do airline pilots need a college degree?   Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Question: What do the in-flight chimes mean? Answer: Different airlines use the chimes differently.  Another possibility would be, "when you have time, could we please have a coffee?" Two chimes are often used to indicate the aircraft is approaching 10,000 feet in altitude.  Cabin crew can also use the chimes to communicate with the flight deck. A single chime could be, "would you like coffee?"  Getty Images/iStockphoto
