A low-key Renee Zellweger loves to hide in plain sight
By Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY
Life of the mind: Renee Zellweger, who stars in New in Town, out Friday, braved the cold recently for two U.S. presidents.NEW YORK — Renee Zellweger has a new man in her life, but he doesn't know it. 
"I have a crush on Jimmy Carter. I admit it," Zellweger says. "He has an extraordinary mind. He's an exceptional human being. And he writes poetry, for crying out loud. He's all good things." 
So wowed was Zellweger that she waited in the blistering Manhattan cold for 21/2 hours on Monday to have the 39th president sign her copy of his latest book, We Can Have Peace in the Holy Land: A Plan That Will Work. 
"It was super-cold," she says. "I thought he was going to speak or read from his book, but he signed. And that was enough. I was not expecting 21/2 hours in 4-inch heels. That, I did not plan for. I made the ridiculous presumption that the Barnes & Noble people would be really nice and let us wait inside. No, that was not happening, because 10 people at a time had to go through security. I was number five-hundred-something. And I got there early, OK?"
But wait she did, in a line that snaked around the Midtown bookstore, and chatted up a father and daughter and a German tourist shivering with her. Zellweger, 39, an intensely private woman who splits her time between rural Connecticut and Manhattan, relishes moments like these, where she can click with humanity without the click of paparazzi cameras.
Born and raised in Katy, Texas, Zellweger is unfailingly polite in person, insisting she order her "shnackies" last at a corner table in the Ritz-Carlton lobby lounge and offering up bites of her endive, goat cheese and beet salad. But Zellweger says her interactions with people frequently are "a little bit tainted. That's how it goes when you have a public persona that precedes you. You just try to neutralize that as quickly as possible so you can get right to the business of getting to know someone." 
In that way, Zellweger differs from her character in New in Town, which opens today. She plays a Miami-based corporate charger who barrels into a Minnesota town — in stilettos and a jacket better suited to a beach — to make the factory her corporation owns more profitable. 
Zellweger's brittle, ambitious Lucy isn't interested in getting to know anyone in teeny New Ulm. Instead, she bickers with a union boss played by Harry Connick Jr. and learns a few lessons about love, life and tapioca pudding. Zellweger signed on to play Lucy because she craved a light, fun comedy in which she could goof around in the snow, giggle on set and even do her own stunts. The film was shot in Winnipeg, and it was so cold that the camera lens would crack, Zellweger says. She couldn't shoot outside without wearing a hat or "you start to die," she says. Sometimes she wore two pairs of pantyhose to stay warm. "Just don't look too closely at the open-sandal toes," she cracks. 
Zellweger, who earned a supporting-actress Oscar for 2003's Cold Mountain and accolades for playing Bridget Jones in the 2001 and 2004 romantic comedies, says she has nothing in common with her abrasive, emotionally tuned-out character. 
"Our value systems are completely different. I liked her shoes, and that's about it," she says. "I'm very familiar with the charms of small towns and don't need to go back to one to learn about it. OK, fish out of water? I feel like that a lot, pretty much every three months or so when I get sent to a new location."
'She takes care of people' 
Nor is Zellweger driven in the same way as Lucy. The latter pursues a vice presidential position in her company at seemingly any cost, while Zellweger says she's hungry for other things in life. 
"I don't need the right stuff. I'm not ambitious for things or acquisitions or a position of power that will garner the respect of people so they will think the right things about me. I'm ambitious for learning and adventure. I want to understand things more. I want to know more. I want experiences, life — I'm very greedy for life experiences."
Connick says Zellweger went out of her way to be nice to those around her. 
"She gave gifts to everyone on set. She gave me some fleur-de-lis glasses. I'm from New Orleans, and that's a prominent symbol there," he says. "She takes care of people, man. She's a very generous human being." 
And one who doesn't court the tabloid press. Red carpets aside, Zellweger excels in hiding in plain sight, whether it's having a low-key dinner at a Chelsea bistro or hitting a Billy Joel show in the Hamptons. Politically aware and well-read on world affairs, Zellweger will discuss global economics with ease. But she doesn't delve into her personal life, which includes a short-lived marriage to country singer Kenny Chesney that ended in 2005 after four months, and relationships with Jack White and Jim Carrey. 
"She's one of the biggest movie stars in the world, but she's able to maintain her private life," Connick says. "She's very shy. You'd think she'd be an extrovert. But she's complex and hard to get to know. There's a lot of layers there."
Zellweger says she has no desire to reveal her entire persona to the public. 
"I don't have an agenda. I just try to have a normal conversation with people," she says. "It's strange, though, because you don't always succeed. Talking about how something is normal isn't normal either, is it? But what's the alternative? I don't have any interest in going to the places where you'd end up in the tabloids. I went to college, and I'm a pretty benign person. I don't need to go to (party) until 6 a.m. I'm attracted to different sorts of experiences, I suppose. Normalcy? It's interesting."
Not a VIP at inauguration 
The actress gets her normalcy where she can. Take the presidential inauguration Jan. 20 in Washington, D.C. Zellweger was there, watching from near the White House, but she flew under the radar, opting out on VIP seating.
"I wanted to be part of it and not in a celebrity way, where you're ushered into your safe place," she says. 
With visible glee, Zellweger recounts her morning running around the capital, trying to find an unblocked street that would let her be near Barack Obama's new home and hear the swearing-in.
"And now it's 10 to 12. And I knew I wasn't going to make it. I'm feeling the energy of all these people," she says. "I feel that something magnificent is about to happen in our country, something very right is coming to be. So I had to get in earshot. I start running. There's a police barricade on First Street. I see an opening on one of those. There's a lady leaning on it. It just so happens that she's blind so she didn't need to stand up. I stand up behind her. I have no ticket, I have no plan. I just wanted to hear him."
Now, she's back in New York, where she has a Midtown apartment. Next up for her? Zellweger has no clue. 
"I want to get bored for a minute," she says. "I want to see what surfaces. I'm never still long enough to say, 'God, I'm interested in this.' Things come up. Right now, I'm satisfied." 
Picky about her films 
Zellweger's film track record has been spotty of late, including the pedigreed 2008 duds Appaloosa and Leatherheads. But she also just wrapped the dramedy My Own Love Song, helmed by French auteur Olivier Dahan, who directed Marion Cotillard to a best-actress Oscar in 2007's La Vie En Rose. Zellweger calls working with him "unbelievable. He's such an artist. He's a musician, he paints, he takes pictures all the time. He laughs very, very easily. He's a very rich person." 
When it comes to her work, Zellweger says she has always been choosy. 
"I allowed myself that from the beginning, before it was logical to say no to things. First scene, up close, her pierced nipple — I thought, 'I don't need to be in this movie.' It's not a road I want to go down, because once you're on it, it's real hard to get off. If you do what you love, everything else follows. If you do what matters to you, everything else falls into place." 
How very Lucy of her to say. 
Posted
