Houston Hobby Airport Guide
Contact information and flight status
fly2houston.com/hou; 713-641-4000, 24 hours.
Checkpoint savvy
Busiest times: Weekdays 7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. to 5 p.m.
Workarounds: None — there is one terminal at HOU, with one central checkpoint. Real-time checkpoint wait times available at HOU website.
Parking
Parking information: 713-641-7770, 24 hours.
Most convenient: Valet, $26/2-24 hours. Blue and Red Garage, $20/day. See more options.
Least expensive: Ecopark 1, $9.24/day (plus tax) Shuttle to terminal. See more options.
Cellphone lot: Located off Airport Boulevard.
Transportation to/from city
Most convenient: A taxi to downtown Houston will cost about $26 and take about 25-35 minutes. Ride-hailing services Uber and Wingz are permitted to serve Hobby Airport. Shared shuttle vans are also available. See more options.
Least expensive: Houston Metro Bus 40 provides local service between the airport and downtown Houston and the George R. Brown Convention Center. Transit time: about 1 hour. Fare: $1.25.
Wi-Fi and charging stations
Free Wi-Fi is provided by the Houston Airport System.
Power outlets: Look for charging stations and work spaces between alternating gates. There are also free charging stations in various locations throughout the terminal.
Go local
Good choice for local gifts: Discover Houston Space City or Rodeo Houston. See all options.
Good choice for local food: Pappadeaux Seafood Kitchen, Pappasito's Cantina. See all options.
Tips and tidbits
Houston's William P. Hobby Airport has a pet relief area (on the east side of the baggage claim area), a USO center and a public art program that includes several noteworthy pieces. There are also 56 rocking chairs made of recycled plastic on a "front porch" outside of the arrivals/baggage claim area.
Nearby layover option
The 1940 Air Terminal Museum is on the west side of Houston Hobby Airport, in the original art-deco airport terminal.
Your tips and picks?
Please share your time- and money-saving tips, favorite restaurants, bars and stores in comments below.
These guides are written by Harriet Baskas, who is the author of six books, including the airport guidebook Stuck at the Airport and a blog of the same name.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/ZSJj9L
