12 most thrilling roller coasters in the USA
Wicked Twister at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio,catapults out of the station and up a twisted, 215-foot-tall tower until it peters out. With a track shaped like the letter "U," the train then freefalls backwards and climbs a second twisted tower on the other side of the station. Walt Schmidt, Cedar Fair Entertainment Company
 But the really nerve-rattling part? It's when the single-car train slowly nudges over the edge of the 90-degree drop, stops for a few knee-knocking moments, and allows riders to contemplate the dive that awaits them. Jordan Sternberg, Cedar Fair Entertainment Company
 One of the most extreme, and certainly most thrilling, coasters on the planet, X2 at Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, Calif., takes riders to the next dimension by independently rotating the seats on a separate axis as the train navigates the track. Six Flags Entertainment
 Most coasters climb a poky lift hill before hitting wild speeds on the first drop, but Superman: Escape from Krypton at Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, Calif., uses electromagnetic motors to blast passengers 100 mph in mere seconds out of the loading station and up a 415-foot tower. Robie Capps, Six Flags Entertainment
Last SlideNext Slide

They don't call them "thrill rides" for nothing.
The screams reverberating on amusement park midways are generated by the thrills that passengers experience as they hurtle along at bone-crushing speeds on roller coasters. Today's mechanical behemoths are faster, taller, crazier – and just plain more thrilling – than their predecessors. How thrilling? Well, check out some of the stats on the country's most extreme coasters.
Full Throttle at Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, Calif.
 This coaster will throw you for a loop – and at 160 feet, it is the world's tallest. Using electromagnetic motors, Full Throttle screams out of the station, hits a full-throated 70 mph in no time flat, and immediately sends passengers racing around its crazy-tall inverting loop. It comes to a halt in a tunnel, launches backwards, then rockets forwards and soars – right side up this time – on the outside of the loop.
Wicked Twister at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio
 Another launched coaster, Wicked Twister catapults out of the station and up a twisted, 215-foot-tall tower until it peters out. With a track shaped like the letter "U," the train then freefalls backwards and climbs a second twisted tower on the other side of the station. Wicked Twister repeats the cycle a few times while revving up to 72 mph and delivering some potent G-forces. There are similar impulse coasters at other parks in the USA, but none reach the heights or speeds of Cedar Point's thriller.
Cannibal at Lagoon in Farmington, Utah
 This unusual ride features an elevator lift inside a darkened, 208-foot-tall silo followed by a 70 mph drop into an underground tunnel at a freaky 116 degrees. That's 26 degrees beyond straight down and the steepest coaster in the USA. If that's not wacky enough, Cannibal then, um, eats at you with four upside-down inversions including a massive 140-foot-tall dive loop.
El Toro at Six Flags Great Adventure in Jackson, N.J.
 Ride fans refer to the negative G-force, out-of-your-seat sensation that coasters deliver as "airtime." I have never experienced so much violent (in the nicest possible sense of the word) airtime as I have on the wooden coaster, El Toro. And that's no bull.
Valravn at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio
 Known as a dive coaster, Valravn is the tallest and fastest of its breed. Its floorless trains climb 223 feet, hit 75 mph, and include head-over-heels inversions. But the really nerve-rattling part? It's when the single-car train slowly nudges over the edge of the 90-degree drop, stops for a few knee-knocking moments, and allows riders to contemplate the dive that awaits them. The country's other dive coasters, Griffon at Busch Gardens Williamsburg (Va.) and SheiKra at Busch Gardens Tampa, are essentially similar but slightly smaller and slower.
X2 at Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, Calif.
 One of the most extreme, and certainly most thrilling, coasters on the planet, X2 takes riders to the next dimension by independently rotating the seats on a separate axis as the train navigates the track. And by rotating, I mean complete 360-degree forward and backward flips. That'd be outrageous enough, but the flip-flopping, face-planting acrobatics take place on a ride that rises 200 feet and reaches 76 mph. Ominous onboard audio featuring heavy metal music adds to the chaos and disorientation.
Millennium Force at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio and Intimidator 305 at Kings Dominion in Doswell, Va.
 The world's first full-circuit coaster to break the 300-foot threshold, Millennium Force ushered in a new age of amusement park thrills. Hitting 93 mph and delivering considerable G-forces, the Cedar Point ride is a perennial fan favorite – at least for brave-hearted fans. Themed to Dale "The Intimidator" Earnhardt, the NASCAR legend's nickname is an apt description for the menacing Intimidator 305. A "giga coaster" like Millennium Force, it boasts similar height and speed stats. But its layout and elements, which feature banked turns that toss riders to and fro, are different. The coaster, which races at a NASCAR-worthy 90 mph, never lets up from the moment passengers hear, "Gentlemen, start your engines!"
Fury 325 at Carowinds in Charlotte, N.C.
 Carowinds upped the giga coaster ante and thrills in 2015 when it unleashed the even taller Fury 325 (325 guesses how tall it climbs). At a scorching 95 mph, it's also among the world's fastest thrill machines. The wild ride, which travels over 1.25 miles of track, greets visitors as they enter the park.
Superman: Escape from Krypton at Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, Calif.
 Most coasters climb a poky lift hill before hitting wild speeds on the first drop, but Six Flags' groundbreaking ride uses electromagnetic motors to blast passengers 100 mph in mere seconds out of the loading station and up a 415-foot tower. Oh, did I mention that riders face backwards for the launch? Or that they experience prolonged weightlessness as they freefall back to earth?
Kingda Ka at Six Flags Great Adventure in Jackson, N.J. and Top Thrill Dragster at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio
 The similar rides, known as rocket coasters, use hydraulic launch systems to sling their trains to dizzying heights and speeds (456 feet – the tallest coaster in the world – and 128 mph for Kingda Ka, 420 feet and 120 mph for Top Thrill Dragster) 90 degrees up and 90 degrees down "top hat" towers. Before passengers have a chance to say, "What just happened?" they are back at the station removing the bugs from their teeth.

 Ohio's Cedar Point, which calls itself the "Roller Coaster Capital of the World," finally divulged what would become of Mean Streak, the shuttered ride that has seen a flurry of unacknowledged construction activity for months. Cedar Fair Entertainment Company
