CNN Profiles - Rani R. Raad - President, CNN International Commercial - CNN
About 
As President, CNN International Commercial, Rani R. Raad is responsible for the commercial strategy and vision for an international news and information portfolio that includes CNNI; CNN en Español; the joint ventures CNN-News18, CNN Turk, CNN Chile, CNN Philippines, CNN Indonesia and CNN.gr with oversight of advertising sales, content sales, business development, international research and marketing activities. Additionally, the development of Turner International's programmatic trading strategy is facilitated under his leadership. 
Raad previously held the position of Executive Vice President and Chief Commercial Officer, CNN International, and prior to that was Senior Vice President and Managing Director for CNN International Ad Sales and Senior Vice President Turkey, Middle East and Africa, chiefly responsible for sales and business development across the CNN platforms. He has a track record of leading teams to drive strong, consistent revenue growth across CNN's commercial business interests, providing compelling, breakthrough solutions to Ad Sales clients and delivering against ambitious targets in both new and established markets. 
Raad began his career with CNN in New York and is now based in London. In 2013, Raad was listed at number 71 in the Arabian Business Power 500 list of the world's most influential Arabs, and in 2015 Raad was named by Arabian Business as the 13th most powerful Arab under 40. In 2011, the World Economic Forum recognised Raad as a Young Global Leader, for his contributions to the media industry. In 2015, Raad was named as one of Syracuse University's S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications' 50Forward -- 50 alumni selected from Newhouse School's 50-year history for their achievements in the media sector. 
Raad graduated with a B.S from The S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University in New York and is fluent in English, French and Arabic. He reports to Gerhard Zeiler, President of Turner International.
