Ravens' national anthem singer explains why he's resigning: This is 'an ethical decision'
By September 26, 2017 10:13 pm  Follow @alyshatsuji  
 5.4k shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | September 26, 2017 10:13 pm  Follow @alyshatsuji  
Correction: Joey Odoms has been a former member of the Maryland Army National Guard since Aug. 10, 2016, and is not a current member as previously stated.
The Baltimore Ravens’ national anthem singer Joey Odoms, who’s a Baltimore native and is also a former member of the Maryland Army National Guard, announced that he’s resigning on Tuesday night via a statement he released on social media.
Odoms wrote that “the tone/actions of a large number of NFL fans in the midst of our country’s cultural crisis have convinced me that I do not belong there. Someone once told me to always ‘go where you’re welcomed.'”
 Joey Odoms, the Ravens' national anthem singer since 2014, has informed the team that he is resigning.
 — Jeff Zrebiec (@jeffzrebiecsun) September 27, 2017
Here’s Odoms’ full statement:
Dear Ravens Flock
I am resigning as Official National Anthem Singer of the Baltimore Ravens. The people I’ve had the pleasure of meeting at the Ravens organization have been nothing but nice to me, however the tone/actions of a large number of NFL fans in the midst of our country’s cultural crisis, have convinced me that I do not belong there. Someone once told me to always “go where you’re welcomed”. This is not an emotional reaction to recent events, rather an ethical decision that part of me regrets but my core knows is the right choice.
 Thank you so much for the opportunity to grow as a performer and for allowing me to live out a dream of sharing my gift with you.
-Joey Odoms
“We greatly appreciate the work Joey did for us, and we thank him.”
Odoms was chosen as the Ravens’ anthem singer in 2014 after telling head coach John Harbaugh that he wanted to be the team’s singer when Harbaugh visited his base in Afghanistan, per a feature story from 2014 on the Ravens’ website.
Odoms’ resignation comes two days after the Ravens kneeled and locked arms during the anthem before their game vs. the Jaguars in London. Other NFL players did the same and some teams stayed in the locker room for the national anthem. The league was responding to President Trump’s comments from a rally in which Trump said that NFL players who protest should be fired.
Here are videos Odoms has shared of himself singing at an NFL game and in Afghanistan:
