NBA Week 14 conclusions: Kawhi Leonard isn't leaving the Spurs
This season hasn't exactly been smooth sailing for San Antonio Spurs superstar Kawhi Leonard, but he's still the face — and the future — of the franchise.
Week 14 of USA TODAY Sports' Jumping to Conclusions tackles the latest on Leonard, takes the pulse of the Portland Trail Blazers and looks at the continued struggles in Cleveland, where the Cavaliers desperately need to make some changes, and fast.
Kawhi Leonard isn't going anywhere
No team is better at avoiding public drama than the Spurs, but the recent ESPN story about a growing disconnect between Leonard and the organization was enough to break that trend. But frustration from all sides is to be expected, as Leonard has played in just nine games this season because of the right quadriceps tendinopathy that is at the root of this ruckus.
He’s out indefinitely, having last played on Jan. 13 and with no timetable for a return. But no, for those who wondered, this situation does not appear to have reached a point where the Spurs are ready to put Leonard on the market. The message from the Spurs to other teams, at present: They’re on the lookout for a promising young player to add to the core of Leonard, All-Star forward LaMarcus Aldridge and new starting point guard, 21-year-old Dejounte Murray.
This should come as no surprise.
Think back for a second to the Western Conference finals, when the Spurs blew a 25-point lead over the Golden State Warriors after Leonard went down with an ankle sprain in Game 1 (a 113-111 Warriors win). Spurs coach Gregg Popovich was irate afterwards, taking aim at Warriors big man Zaza Pachulia for his alleged undercutting that led to Leonard’s season-ending injury. Yet while the Warriors sweep ensued, there was a strong sense from all involved on the San Antonio side that – when healthy – they were capable of taking down the champs.
It’s no wonder Pop was so upset.
So now a Leonard injury is the most maddening of obstacles again, and the Spurs are left to wonder how special this season might be if only he was healthy. Even without him, and with Aldridge leading the way, they’re third in the West at 32-18. (Amick)
A change to the Cavs' lineup is necessary
Cavs coach Tyronn Lue said a change is coming to the starting lineup, but he declined to say what the change will be. But he knows this much: a change is required.
In January, the Cavs’ starting lineup of Isaiah Thomas, J.R. Smith, Jae Crowder, LeBron James and Kevin Love has the worst net-rating (minus-22.8) of any five-man lineup in the league with at least 70 minutes played. That group has the worst offensive rating (95 points per 100 possessions) and worst defensive rating (117.7 points allowed per 100 possessions) of any lineup with at least 70 minutes played this month. For comparison’s sake, Cleveland’s best lineup with at least 70 minutes in November and December include Jose Calderon in the starting lineup. (Zillgitt)
The Blazers' backcourt isn't changing anytime soon
The Blazers are in no-man’s land.
No matter how many times you stare at those highlights of Damian Lillard and C.J. McCollum slicing up opposing backcourts, it doesn’t change the fact that there isn’t much there in terms of would-be title contention beyond their two stars – especially with Jusuf Nurkic having such an inconsistent season. And with Portland coming off two consecutive seasons in which they hovered around .500, it should come as no surprise that the Blazers – currently 26-22 and on pace for 44 wins – are getting restless.
But while Lillard’s recent meeting with owner Paul Allen to discuss the organization’s plan sparked speculation about a trade involving him or McCollum before the Feb. 8 deadline, the Blazers’ message to inquiring teams remains the same: Both players are still considered untouchable. So, what now?
Only general manager Neil Olshey knows for sure. They have strong interest in Los Angeles Clippers big man DeAndre Jordan (along with the Cavs and Milwaukee Bucks as other known suitors) and would have serious interest in the Oklahoma City Thunder’s Paul George if general manager Sam Presti changed his current stance and decided to trade the four-time All-Star. And considering Olshey is among the most aggressive executives in the league, rest assured that list of names is much longer.
If only all those complications weren’t in the way.
The Blazers have the NBA’s fifth-highest payroll (approximately $122 million), with Evan Turner (two seasons and a combined $36.4 million remaining on his deal), Maurice Harkless (two seasons and a combined $22.3 million left), and Meyers Leonard (two seasons and $21.8 million left) all tying up significant salary cap space. Making matters worse, Harkless and Leonard are not even in coach Terry Stotts’ rotation.
And while the 23-year-old Nurkic is the kind of player who could attract all sorts of interest because of both his skill-set and his contract, Lillard is known to see the restricted-free-agent-to-be as a pivotal part of their future. Translation: Just like Lillard and McCollum, Nurkic is unlikely to be included in any deal. (Amick)
Don’t discount the Philadelphia 76ers at the trade deadline
With two weeks until the deadline, a handful of teams have been in trade rumor discussions. The Sixers have remained under the radar, and rightfully so. Given their roster construction and president of basketball operations Bryan Colangelo’s desire to protect cap space for a run at a prominent free agent (LeBron James, perhaps?), the Sixers don’t want to take on future money in a trade.
However, if the Sixers can get an outside shooter on an expiring deal, they would be open for a deal. Jerryd Bayless – who is due $8.5 million next season – is the obvious candidate for the Sixers to move if they go in that direction. (Zillgitt)
Follow USA TODAY Sports' Sam Amick and Jeff Zillgitt on Twitter

 Jan. 24: Pacers forward Domantas Sabonis dunks against Suns center Greg Monroe (14) and forward T.J. Warren (12) during the first quarter at Bankers Life Fieldhouse in Indianapolis. Brian Spurlock, USA TODAY Sports
