Meg Whitman takes CEO reins at Katzenberg mobile video startup NewTV
Former HPE CEO Meg Whitman, has been named CEO of NewTV, a mobile-centric video company founded by former DreamWorks Animation CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 
CLOSE

 Meg Whitman is stepping down, President Antonio Neri will replace her. Time

Former HPE CEO Meg Whitman, who three decades ago worked at Disney, is back in the entertainment field.
Whitman has been named CEO of mobile video company NewTV, founded by former DreamWorks Animation CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg. She's leaving computer storage and server company HPE at the end of the month.
 She will join NewTV, the working name of Katzenberg's latest venture, on March 1. NewTV, based in Los Angeles, is focused on producing Hollywood-quality mobile video content of 10 minutes or less.
“NewTV is one of the most disruptive and timely ideas I’ve come across during my career,” Whitman said in a statement. “I share Jeffrey’s vision that top-quality programming tailored to our mobile lifestyles is the next big touchpoint in entertainment.”
Whitman has established herself as one of the top names in Silicon Valley, from the early days of eBay to dabbling in state politics to her last gig at HPE.
Last summer, the former eBay CEO was in the running to succeed ousted Uber CEO Travis Kalanick. At HP, she split the Silicon Valley giant into two parts, one focused on printers and PCs (keeping the HP name) and another on servers and storage (HPE). HPE has also spun off its enterprise services business and merged its enterprise software business during her tenure.
 After a decade at eBay, Whitman entered the 2010 California governor race as a Republican, which she lost to her Democratic challenger, Gov. Jerry Brown. Before joining eBay, she spent time as an executive at Disney and Hasbro. She previously served on the DreamWorks Animation board.
“Meg is one of the most accomplished and sought-after executives of our time. She has built and scaled some of the most important global companies today,” Katzenberg, who is NewTV's chairman, said in a statement. “To say I am thrilled that Meg will be at the helm would be an understatement..”
NewTV is a startup from WndrCo, an incubator created by Katzenberg with former DreamWorks Animation COO Ann Daly and Dropbox CFO Sujay Jaswa after Comcast acquired DreamWorks Animation in April 2016.
