Grateful Ventures launches refreshed Thanksgiving.com ahead of holiday season
CONNECTTWEET 34 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Thanksgiving.com, a branch of online media and publishing company Grateful Ventures, launched a refreshed look today just in time for the holiday season.
Grateful Ventures, a site that creates lifestyle content and monetization strategies for high-influence food/cooking websites and bloggers, was recently acquired in October by USA TODAY NETWORK as its new lifestyle vertical. With Thanksgiving.com being the company’s first product since the acquisition, the refreshed layout aims to target audiences in a way that is both easy to access and interactive.
The new site features holiday content in an updated and user-friendly layout, allowing consumers to access the ultimate holiday guide. Content is focused on holiday histories, fun facts, how-to’s, crafts, humor, cooking tips, and much more.
The pieces published on Thanksgiving.com are produced by Grateful Ventures’ editors and writers as well as curated pieces from its blogger network, Food Blog Stars. All recipes posted are tested and approved in their kitchen by the team and a tasting panel. Additionally, the group recently hosted the “Ultimate Thanksgiving” video shoot at its Phoenix location which captured, developed, and created new content and articles focused on the art of hosting.
With its guiding principle of “good people doing good,” the founders of Grateful aim to spread the holiday spirit not just during the last two months of the year but year-round. “Our goal is to celebrate food, friends, family and gratitude all year long and to deliver a top-notch experience for our visitors, so they’ll come back to us as their preferred destination for everything related to the holidays,” said Kyle Cox, co-founder of Grateful Ventures. “The new site layout delivers truly visually engaging content that makes planning for the holiday season more enjoyable.”
“Thanksgiving.com is a great complement to the host of sites producing unique and engaging holiday content across the network,” said Maribel Wadsworth, president, USA TODAY NETWORK. “Well known for its original recipes, crafts, holiday traditions and more, the team at thanksgiving.com is best positioned to make sure consumers are getting the seasonal content they crave.”
For more information on Thanksgiving.com’s refreshed look, click here.
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2hOYpzU
