State law defunds U. of Tennessee's Office of Diversity and Inclusion
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 

Students at a “Mass Class Exit” protesting state legislative action against the University of Tennessee’s Office of Diversity and Inclusion, April 19, 2016. (Photo: Alex Phillips, The Daily Beacon)
Corrections and clarifications: A previous version of this article misstated how funds from the Office of Diversity of Inclusion would be allocated.
Students who take advantage of the Pride Center at the University of Tennessee-Knoxville have learned they’ll have to run it themselves.
That’s because Tennessee recently passed House Bill 2248, which defunds the school’s Office of Diversity and Inclusion in favor of minority engineering scholarships. But while some of its units will be reorganized, taking the biggest hit is the school’s Pride Center — an on-campus resource for LGBTQIA issues — which will remain open, but no longer be staffed.
“Personally, I’m outraged,” says Amanda Alarcon, a graduate student at the university. “I think it’s despicable that they go after marginalized students and harm the mission of diversity that this institution has. It’s despicable.”
Chancellor Jimmy Cheek announced in an email that “the new law does not permit us to reallocate money to continue to fund the Office of Diversity and Inclusion from another budget. As a result, there will be a reorganization of the units that reported to the vice chancellor for diversity and inclusion.”
This is due in part to the bill specifying that federal compliance requirements be maintained.
Sections being reorganized include the Office of Multicultural Student Life, the Office of Equity and Diversity, the Educational Advancement Program and the Commission for Blacks, the Commission for LGBT People, the Commission for Women and the Council for Diversity and Interculturalism.
Students known as Pride Center Ambassadors will now run the center —which maintains its physical space on campus — according to Johnathan Clayton, a Pride Center Ambassador. Donna Braquet, who was removed as the center’s director on May 20, has started a campaign to help it raise money.
Republicans in the Tennessee legislature have been calling for the defunding for the Office of Diversity and Inclusion for a while now. One reason is a statement Braquet published last summer regarding gender neutral pronouns, reported the Knoxville News Sentinel, in which the office asked the university to use gender-neutral pronouns such as “ze,” as well as a December post about cultural sensitivity during the holidays.
Students later formed the UT Diversity Matters Coalition to advocate for diversity-related issues, including the prevention of HB 2248.
The coalition spoke to state legislators in Nashville in March and organized a Mass Class Exit in April, according to Clayton. They also organized what Clayton called a “die-in,” an event where students lie down on the ground to block a main walkway on campus.
 Fast food workers in the #FightFor15 support the #UTDiversityMatters walkout. pic.twitter.com/mGEIEbuXiQ
 — Show Me $15 (@Show_Me15) April 19, 2016
The University of Tennessee-Knoxville has not yet returned a request for comment.
In his email, Cheek also wrote that “this in no way diminishes our commitment to diversity and inclusion. The new law doesn’t impact most of the funding for those efforts. We will use the coming year to determine how to more effectively advance diversity and inclusion on our campus, how to measure the effectiveness of our efforts, and who should lead those efforts in the future.”
Courtney Rozen is a student at American University and a USA TODAY College breaking news correspondent.
