College Football Playoff names six new selection committee members
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: Amidst the confetti, Trysta Krick and George Schroeder break down Alabama's thrilling OT win. USA TODAY Sports

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 2 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Corrections/clarifications: A previous version of this story included an incorrect name for the president of Robert Morris University.
Six new members will join the College Football Playoff selection committee and a new chairman will take the reins next month, the Playoff announced Wednesday.
Already a sitting member of the committee, Oregon athletics director Rob Mullens will ascend to the chairman position on Feb. 1, replacing Texas Tech athletics director Kirby Hocutt.
“College football plays a vital role in intercollegiate athletics, and it is an honor to continue to serve on the CFP Selection Committee,” Mullens said. “I look forward to partnering with the other committee members and the staff to build on the strong foundation which has been created in the first four years of the CFP.”
Among the six new members are three sitting athletics directors from Power Five conferences in Oklahoma’s Joe Castiglione, Florida’s Scott Stricklin and Georgia Tech’s Todd Stansbury, which meets the committee’s criteria of having one AD from each of college football’s major leagues.
Also joining the committee is former Air Force, Arkansas, Clemson and Rice head coach Ken Hatfield, who compiled a record of 168-140-4 before retiring in 2005.
Former Southern California and Pro Football Hall of Fame safety Ronnie Lott becomes the second former player to be selected for the committee, joining former Mississippi and NFL quarterback Archie Manning. Due to health reasons, Manning never participated in any of the committee’s weekly rankings.
And the sixth newest member is former Arizona Republic sports columnist Paola Boivin, who replaces former USA TODAY Sports reporter Steve Wieberg as the committee’s media representative.
Holdovers from this past season’s selection committee roster are Mullens, Robert Morris University President Chris Howard, former Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer, Ohio State athletics director Gene Smith, former Southern Mississippi head coach Jeff Bower and former Central Michigan head coach Herb Deromedi.
IMAGES FROM THE COLLEGE FOOTBALL BOWL SEASON
