CNN Profiles - Tom Foreman - Correspondent - CNN
About 
Tom Foreman is an Emmy award-winning journalist whose experience spans more than three decades, and touches virtually every major news story in that time period. Foreman has traveled to all 50 U.S. states and more than twenty countries to report on, among many topics, CNN's America's Choice 2016 presidential campaign cycle, the Paris terror attacks, the disappearance of passenger plane MH370, and the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. He leads the network's fact checking initiative and in 2013 Foreman and the fact checking team were awarded the Walter Cronkite/Brooks Jackson Award. 
Foreman joined CNN in 2004 and is based in the network's Washington, D.C. bureau, where he covers a wide-range of topics for the network and reports for programs across the spectrum, from The Situation Room with Wolf Blitzer to Anderson Cooper 360ยบ. Foreman has pioneered much of CNN's work in new media, by playing a key role in the development of an immersive, 3-D Virtual Studio which has taken viewers into space to study satellites, travels onto distant battlefields to promote better understanding of dangerous conflicts and takes a deep dive analysis on the 2016 election cycle.
In addition, Foreman writes a weekly newspaper column, penned more than 1400 open letters to President Obama on CNN.com, and anchors CNN's year-in-review show on New Year's Eve.
Foreman's reporting career began at a small radio station in Alabama while he was still in high school. After college, he worked for WSFA in Montgomery, Ala., and then for WWL-TV in New Orleans, La. For 10 years, he worked as a roving reporter for ABC News from its Denver bureau. Foreman moved to Washington in 2000 to become the senior anchor for National Geographic and managing editor for Inside Base Camp, for which he won his second Emmy Award as best interviewer.
Foreman graduated Magna Cum Laude from Troy State University in Troy, Ala., and holds an honorary doctorate from Quinnipiac University. He is an avid ultra-marathoner, frequently competing in races of 50 miles or more. Most recently, Foreman wrote about about his journey through four half-marathons, three marathons and one 55-mile race in his book My year of Running Dangerously.
