Anthony Mackie got his comedic 'Night Before' role by bullying Seth Rogen
CLOSE

 Seth Rogen, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Anthony Mackie and Jonathan Levine, the director of 'The Night Before,' talk about how Anthony Mackie got the art to join the guys who previously worked together on '50/50.' 
Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this post had an incorrect list of Anthony Mackie's previous roles.
After working together on critically acclaimed dramedy 50/50, director Jonathan Levine re-teamed with stars Seth Rogen and Joseph Gordon-Levitt for holiday film The Night Before. But before the guys could start shooting, they needed a third actor to star in their comedy about three best friends celebrating Christmas together.
They cast... Anthony Mackie? 

Mackie, known for starring in The Hurt Locker and playing Marvel superhero the Falcon, had never done a broad comedy before. At Wednesday night's festive premiere of The Night Before in downtown Los Angeles (filled with ugly Christmas sweaters and women dancing in giant snowglobes), Mackie explained to USA TODAY how he infiltrated "the Hebrew group... the Tribe" as he calls the Jewish trio of Rogen, Gordon-Levitt and Levine:
"I thought there was no way I would get this role... so (at the audition) I thought I would go all out and bully Seth, for like 30 minutes. And he literally just turned red and hated it," said Mackie.
But Levine, the director, loved it.
"(Mackie) and Seth played so well together. It just became a no-brainer (to cast him)."
On set, the bullying continued.
"I remember pinching his nipples, crotch-punching him, pushing him around a little bit. I remember every scene, bullying him. And he couldn't stop laughing, because I was tickling him," said Mackie about Rogen.
Yep, Rogen, who's also a producer on the film, remembers the nipple pinching.
"He did mess with me a little bit. He's very gregarious," said Rogen. "He had a lot of energy and (seemed like) he would be a good addition to the group, though he pushed my buttons a little bit and he annoys me a little bit."
