Racially offensive activity reported at Xavier Univ. and Iowa State
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 
Racially offensive actions have come under fire at two universities this week: Xavier University in Ohio, and Iowa State University.
A white female student at Xavier University apparently posted a photo on her Snapchat Story Monday of herself in blackface with the caption “Who needs white when black lives matter.” 
The image went viral after a black Xavier student reposted the image on Facebook, saying “We are tired of the blatant racism that is so comfortably shown to us on Xavier’s campus,” according to the New York Daily News. 
The following morning, another picture was circulating as well: an image of a skeleton hanging from the ceiling in African attire, seen through a dorm window. According to the Daily News, the skeleton was dressed in a traditional West African dashiki with a “TRUMP, Make America Great Again” flag hanging next to it. 
 @FOX19 Blatant racism at #XavierUniversity black face and a skeleton dressed in a dashiki with a noose around its neck!! Please share pic.twitter.com/2CjhdtVyl2
 — Erica Smith (@urekaxoxo) October 25, 2016
A student told WDTN News that she saw the skeleton before it was taken down. 
“I think it’s a very scary thing, especially to wake up in the morning and see that, because I live right across the hall from the person who had the dashiki and the skeleton,” she told WDTN. “It’s a very scary thing and we need to take action about it.”
In response to the two images, Xavier President Father Mike Graham said in a letter:
“I am outraged and deeply troubled by recent racist images connected to Xavier students. Racist actions are unacceptable on our campus, and we have mechanisms to respond in a responsible and thoughtful manner. When one of us falls short, we all fall short.
“Many of our students, of all races, are in pain over this. Steps are being taken to make sure that all members of the Xavier community know that we must act with integrity, justice and generosity, in solidarity for and with each other. Please be assured this is being addressed on campus through a variety of channels.
I will personally continue to stay on top of this and keep you updated.”
The university held what they called a “support forum on campus racism.”
 Thanks to everyone who attended the support forum on campus racism today. We can, must and will do better. pic.twitter.com/2NQs9l7YkC
 — Xavier University (@XavierUniv) October 26, 2016
And then on Thursday at Iowa State, students reported finding several buildings covered with posters about white pride, according to the Daily News.
According to an email from the university’s administration, the signs sported messages such as “White students/You are not alone/Be proud of your heritage,” and “In 1950 America was 90% white/It is now only 60% white/Will you become a minority in your own country?” 
 Found on ISU's campus today. White supremacy is alive at #MyPWI
Happy Homecoming Iowa State way to #LeaveYourLegaCY pic.twitter.com/OgGocz1MGk
 — RAQUEL (@rjramirezzz) October 27, 2016
The posters were removed because they violated the university’s facilities and grounds use policy and discrimination and harassment policies, Iowa State Daily reports. The university police department is looking for leads and encouraging students to report any suspicious activity.
The administration sent an email to the Iowa State community saying the posters about white heritage were taken down and encouraging students to work toward a healthy campus environment.
“These posters also depict historical references or messages that could evoke feelings of bias or racism,” the letter read. “As members of the Cyclone Family, we must remain committed to working together toward a more inclusive, respectful and accepting campus.”
Christy Osler is a Boston University student and a USA TODAY College digital producer.
