Universal Studios Hollywood: Behind the scenes to center stage
"Glamour Trams" roamed the studio's backlot and gave passengers glimpses of films and TV shows in production, famous movie sets, stars' dressing rooms, and the inner workings of special effects. Stars like Ernest Borgnine from "McHale's Navy" would sometimes be spotted. Universal Studios Hollywood
 The Studio Tour remains a vital part of the Universal experience. The soundstages, production bungalows, and backlot streets that the trams encounter are no mere theme park facsimiles. The house from "Psycho" remains a part of every tour. Universal Studios Hollywood
 The tours are the real deal, and tram drivers often have to pause and hush passengers when they approach a live set. It gives Universal Studios Hollywood a cachet of credibility and authenticity. You never know what you'll find on the tour. Universal Studios Hollywood
 Everything within the village, including the snow-capped shops, the majestic Hogwarts Castle, the settled and slightly askew buildings, and the bird droppings in the Owlery conspires to convince muggles that they have arrived in Scotland to meet Harry and the gang. David Sprague, Universal Studios Hollywood
Last SlideNext Slide

The recently opened Wizarding World of Harry Potter caps a massive five-year expansion at Universal Studios Hollywood. Estimated to have cost $1.6 billion, the overhaul transformed 75% of the movie theme park according to its president, Larry Kurzweil. The additions and changes mark more than a bid for big buzz, higher attendance, increased sales, and a larger slice of SoCal's tourism pie: They signal a fundamental shift in the park's mission.
Opened 51 years ago, Universal Studios Hollywood initially invited visitors to peek behind its moviemaking curtain. "Glamour Trams" roamed the studio's backlot and gave passengers glimpses of films and TV shows in production, famous movie sets, stars' dressing rooms, and the inner workings of special effects.
Since the Wizarding World opened, however, guests have been coming to the park armed with wands and dressed in Gryffindor and Hufflepuff robes. They don't want to learn about the techniques that enabled actor Daniel Radcliffe to fly for his quidditch scenes in the Potter movies. They want to fly with Harry during a quidditch match. They don't want to go behind the scenes; they want to be in the scene.
That's not to say that visitors no longer ogle iconic movie sets. The Studio Tour remains a vital part of the Universal experience. The soundstages, production bungalows, and backlot streets that the trams encounter are no mere theme park facsimiles. They are the real deal, and tram drivers often have to pause and hush passengers when they approach a live set. It gives Universal Studios Hollywood a cachet of credibility and authenticity.
It's also not to say that prior to Potter, Universal never put visitors in the middle of the action. Long before the park opened, the studio used to invite the public onto its lot. Guests would literally go behind the scenes to sit in bleachers and watch silent movies being shot. According to John Murdy, the park's creative director and unofficial historian, there are photos dating back to around 1915 of a partially submerged backlot. The studio attempted to stage a flash flood to show visitors how filmmakers create a disaster scene, but the presentation got out of hand.
To this day, Studio Tour passengers can see a flash flood race down a hillside and towards the tram — albeit a carefully controlled flood. "It's always been a balance of the real Hollywood and fantasy worlds," says Murdy. The balance, however, has been shifting more towards fantasy as the park has evolved.
When it opened in the mid-1960s, the tour was pretty much all that Universal Studios offered. It began to add stunt, makeup, and other shows to extend the experience and show different facets of moviemaking. Murdy sees the Battlestar Galactica sequence, which the park added to the tour in the 1970s, as a turning point. The trams entered a large spaceship, and aliens threatened to kidnap the passengers amid (then trendy) laser blasts. The presentation didn't attempt to deconstruct the television show's production and served mainly as entertainment to briefly envelop guests in the program's science fiction world.
Other shows and attractions followed based on properties such as Conan the Barbarian and Earthquake. They also were more about storytelling and less about telling how movies were made. In 1991, E.T. Adventure opened as the park's first "dark ride," an industry term for an attraction that uses ride vehicles to take passengers through an indoor show building. Around the same time, sister park Universal Studios Florida opened, which had its own, similar E.T. attraction. The Florida version was more of a conventional theme park and paved the way for the Hollywood park's evolution.
In the ride's preshow, Steven Spielberg appeared via video — not to explain how he created the E.T. movie, but to say that the alien was in trouble and needed guests' help to return him to his home planet. The endearing ride (which has since closed in Hollywood but remains open in Orlando) was pure fantasy. Still, it was located inside a building that looked like a soundstage and reinforced the park's identity as a movie studio.
More sophisticated, story-based attractions followed, including Jurassic Park — The Ride in 1996. Passengers confront animatronic dinosaurs in the boat-based adventure and plummet down a huge flume for the thrilling finale. Unlike the more nondescript facades of the park's other rides, the Jurassic Park attraction was the first to include extensive themeing and lush landscaping outside of its show building. Visitors don't enter a soundstage; they enter a replica of the film's tropical setting.
Fast forward to 2014. As part of Universal's recently wrapped expansion, it opened Despicable Me Minion Mayhem, an acclaimed motion simulator ride. Outside the ride is a small street that depicts the home of the peculiar yellow characters as well as Super Silly Fun Land, a bright Minion-themed play zone, which includes the park's first spinning ride.
In 2015, Universal enhanced The Simpsons Ride with an entire land devoted to Springfield, the cartoon family's well-known hometown. Guests can order a Duff Beer in Moe's Tavern, visit the Kwik-E-Mart, and play a carnival game at Krustyland. The area has nothing to do with how the television show is animated and everything to do with immersing visitors in the show's warped and hilarious parallel universe.
The Wizarding World's level of immersion, however, is an order of magnitude greater. Once guests pass under the arch and enter Hogsmeade, they are transported through an astonishing degree of detail to J.K. Rowling's mythical world. Everything within the village, including the snow-capped shops, the rustic pub, the majestic Hogwarts Castle, the settled and slightly askew buildings, and the bird droppings in the Owlery conspires to convince muggles that they have arrived in Scotland to meet Harry and the gang. It is theme park placemaking taken to a breathtaking new level.

There are some actual artifacts from the movies' sets sprinkled throughout the Wizarding World. But unlike Universal's early days, they aren't there so visitors can gawk at them. "We don't want to put on signs, and say that they are film props," says Alan Gilmore, the art director for some of the Potter films as well as the theme park land. "This is a real place. We want you to actually feel that you're in the real world of Harry Potter, and that you are a character."
"This is a pivotal moment in our history," says Universal's Murdy. "It's been an epic transformation." Still, the park isn't about to abandon its legacy. He notes that unlike Universal Studios in Florida and other locations, the original one in Hollywood was never master planned as a theme park, but instead grew organically over the years. Despite its move to ever more immersive lands and experiences, it remains an actual, working movie studio. "The Studio Tour is our anchor, and we value it," Murdy adds. "The Psycho house is still here. We're stewards of the past. It's up to us to take care of these things."
CONNECTTWEET 681 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1T9J1Xa
