In the midst of disaster, Guy Fieri and José Andrés feed the nation
CLOSE

 After the celebrity chef had to evacuate his home, he decided to help feed other victims. Time

CONNECTTWEET 11 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Food Network’s Guy Fieri has been cooking in a parking lot in Sonoma, Calif. since last Thursday. Restaurateur and chef José Andrés, meanwhile, has parked satellite kitchens across Puerto Rico since September 25.
 Lines are long, but the menus — ranging from mashed potatoes to paella — serve one thing: comfort food.
 In the devastating wake and haze of Hurricane Maria and Northern California’s wildfires, both celebrity chefs are among the many first responders stepping up to the plate, bringing their skills — and fistfuls of star power — to the table.
Fieri, a Santa Rosa, Calif. resident among the area’s estimated 100,000 displaced by wildfires that seared through neighborhoods, businesses and wineries in Northern California’s wine country, assembled friends, family and colleagues, as well as mobile barbecues, in the Veterans Memorial Building’s parking lot in Sonoma.
Working with The Salvation Army, they arrived to serve, and served plenty: more than 5,000 people a day.
“This ordeal is far from over and the need is only growing,” wrote Fieri on a donations page that benefits The Salvation Army. From chicken to pork loin, baked beans to braised cabbage, his impromptu kitchen has served home cooking to firefighters, evacuees and volunteers in their time of need when many homes have been lost.
 Meanwhile in Puerto Rico — and on the heels of his relief efforts in Houston after Hurricane Harvey — D.C.’s José Andrés has stationed himself for more than three weeks.
 After Hurricane Maria devastated the island in September, Andrés and his nonprofit, World Central Kitchen, have worked alongside local chefs like José Enrique to churn out dishes from Puerto Rican stew to paella. As of October 17, FEMA confirmed that only 14% of Puerto Rico has electricity. Certain areas still lack food and water, and so Andrés’ World Central Kitchen is staying put until the island is back up and running.
On Tuesday, Andrés tweeted an announcement worth shouting: Their combined efforts officially served 1 million hot meals.
And they’re still counting.
Those interested in helping these missions can donate to José Andrés’ World Central Kitchen, and Guy Fieri’s donations page in partnership with The Salvation Army.
After 3 wks,15 kitchens, 500+volunteers, today @WCKitchen#ChefsForPuertoRico served 1millionth meal in Puerto Rico! https://t.co/tPdzgOMNfkpic.twitter.com/ELwVhiNGQ7
— José Andrés (@chefjoseandres) October 17, 2017
CONNECTTWEET 11 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2zufClH
