FBI: Hate crimes targeting Muslims up 67% in 2015
WASHINGTON — Hate crimes increased by nearly 7% last year, including a 67% spike in incidents targeting Muslims, according to the FBI's annual report.
Not since 2001, when the United States was struck by the most deadly terrorist assaults in history, have more incidents been recorded against Muslims.
Overall, the FBI reported 5,850 hate incidents across the country in 2015, compared to 5,479 in 2014. There were 1,244 such incidents rooted in some religious motivation last year, compared to 1,014 incidents the year before.
The statistics come as civil rights groups have been monitoring a spasm of religious and racially charged incidents following the election of Republican Donald Trump as president. The Southern Poverty Law Center, which closely tracks the extremist movement across the U.S., said the "exploitation'' of the Islamic State's attacks last year in Europe and terrorist-inspired strikes in the U.S. likely "fueled anti-Muslim hatred.''

"But what was likely even more important was Trump's attacks on Muslims, including his infamous call for a ban on Muslims entering the U.S.,'' said Mark Potok, editor of the the group's Intelligence Report.
Sunday marked a year since Islamic State terrorists carried out a stunning, coordinated assault in Paris, leaving at least 130 dead.

Less than a month after the Paris attacks and just days after a mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., believed to have been inspired by the group, Trump called for a total prohibition on Muslim immigration into the U.S.
Yet the volatile reaction to last week's election continues to expose raw emotions on both sides. In the days since Trump's election, thousands of demonstrators have taken to the streets in cities across the country. While largely peaceful, police made dozens of arrests in Portland last weekend. At the same time, reports of vandalism, harassment and intimidation against racial, ethnic and religious groups were being closely monitored and blamed, at least in part, on the flammable rhetoric Trump espoused on the campaign trail.
"The harassment and discrimination has been widespread, targeting people based on race, ethnicity and national origin, as well as region and sexual orientation, '' ACLU senior staff attorney Heather Weaver wrote. "Not surprisingly, in light of promises to ban Muslims from our country and to single out American Muslims for surveillance, many of the victims have been Muslim.''
In California, San Diego State University officials were investigating Thursday's robbery of a Muslim student wearing a traditional hijab who reported that the suspects made disparaging comments about the Muslim community and referred to Trump.
University President Elliot Hirshman and other school officials characterized the incident in statement as a crime rooted in hate.
"We condemn this hateful act and urge all members of our community to join us in condemning such hateful acts,'' Hirshman said. "Hate crimes are destructive to the spirit of our campus and we urge all members of our community to stand together in rejecting hate."
The investigation was continuing, university spokeswoman Gina Jacobs said Monday.
Asked about the incidents Sunday on CBS' 60 Minutes, Trump said the actions saddened him.
"Stop it,'' Trump said.
CONNECTTWEET 13 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2frKmwF
