50 state road trip: Iconic landmarks around the USA
Alaska - The Denali range in Alaska boasts the highest mountain peak in North America, making it a popular destination for climbers and sightseers alike. It recently made news when President Obama declared the peak would no longer be officially referred to as Mt. McKinley, as it had been since 1917. PhotosbyAndy, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Arkansas - In 1957, after a Supreme Court ruling legalized the integration of public schools 3 years earlier, nine Black high school students attempted to enter Little Rock Central High School. The students were greeted by a mob of angry white people and then escorted away by police. gnagel, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Connecticut - Like much of the Northeast, Connecticut‘s early history is often tied to its proximity to the sea. Mystic Seaport is a top spot for learning about Connecticut’s history with whaling and fishing, among other maritime pursuits. Mona Makela, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Florida - Florida is known for many things, but maybe one of the most famous is Walt Disney World. Given that the resort is the number one vacation destination in the world, Cinderella’s castle has to be the state's top landmark. Disney
 Hawaii - Pearl Harbor on Oahu, Hawaii was the scene of an infamous surprise military attack by Japanese airmen on U.S. troops and ships stationed there. Over 2,400 Americans were killed. The war memorial at the site is the number one visitor destination in Hawaii. Master_Yendor, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Idaho - Craters of the Moon is a protected National Preserve with three large natural lava fields and surrounding grasslands. The Great Rift of Idaho is an area of the preserve that has open rift cracks in the earth, including the deepest known in the world at 800 feet. zrfphoto, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Illinois - Given that Chicago is one of the most famous cities in the world, it’s no surprise the most iconic landmark in Illinois resides there. The Bean is properly called Cloud Gate and is a sculpture by artist Anish Kapoor located in Millennium Park. starmaro, Getty Images
 Maine - Portland Head Light is an iconic lighthouse on the shores of Maine. Not only is it the oldest lighthouse in the state but arguably the most picturesque. It’s often depicted in paintings and other artistic representations of Maine. agaliza, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Massachusetts - Every American child learns about the pilgrims and Plymouth Rock, where they arrived in 1620. Except reference to an actual rock wasn’t written until 1741. Plymouth “Rock” essentially memorializes the harbor in Plymouth, a popular tourist destination. peterspiro, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Michigan - The Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn pays tribute to the man credited for paving the way for the modern car market, mass producing his Ford model cars. The large museum, all about innovation and ideas, is a popular destination in Michigan. From the collection of the Henry Ford Museum
 Mississippi - The birthplace of blues is one of Mississippi’s proudest claims, and the Blues Trail takes you on journey through its history. The tour guides you through the towns of BB King, Big Jack Johnson, and Bo Diddley, just to name a few. BluesBoyBob
 New York - Not only a landmark for the state of New York and New York City, but the Statue of Liberty is a proud symbol of American freedom. It was gifted to the United States by the people of France and dedicated in 1886. Marek Slusarczyk, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 North Carolina - While the Wright Brothers first flight at Kitty Hawk could be argued as North Carolina’s most famous landmark, it’s really just a strip of land. The Biltmore Estate, on the other hand, is a grand, luxurious mansion with gorgeous gardens and extravagant furnishings. Rauluminate, Getty Images
 North Dakota - The Badlands of North Dakota are famous for being one of Theodore Roosevelt’s favorite places to visit. Much of the area is now Theodore Roosevelt National Park to honor his love of the state. Within the park is an area with beautiful rock formations and expansive views of the canyon referred to as “Painted Canyon.” jerryhopman, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 South Dakota - South Dakota is famous for its Badlands, so of course one of the most scenic drives in the state is the 30 mile loop on Highway 240. Check out all the unique rock formations and native grasslands that this area of the country is famous for. zrfphoto, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Tennessee - The Cades Cove Loop in Tennessee is one of the shorter scenic drives on our list. Only 11 miles, the one-lane road offers beautiful valley views of the Great Smoky Mountains as well as historic homes from the community that settled in the area in 1818. Wilsilver77, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Texas - Texas is known for long stretches of roads to nowhere, but north of the town of Quitaque is the Palo Duro Canyon State Park. There you will see the Palo Duro Canyon and the Caprock canyons, both majestic rock formations worthy of a scenic rendezvous. zrfphoto, Getty Images/iStockphoto
