In isolated Puerto Rican town, a need for water, power  — and news
CLOSE

 Puerto Rican officials could not communicate with more than half the towns in the U.S. territory as the massive scale of the disaster wrought by Hurricane Maria started to become clear. AP

CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misstated the distance from Puerto Rico's east coast to the island of Culebra. It's actually about 20 miles.
ARECIBO, Puerto Rico — People in this ravaged city get their drinking water from a hole poked into a fire hose attached to a street hydrant. 
No one has power and they haven't heard from the outside world in four days, when Hurricane Maria barreled through here early Wednesday, smashing homes and sending walls of water through town. 
Now residents here face a new peril: the Guajataca Dam, which was threatening to breach and could send more floods their way.
"Unfortunately, we're right in its path," said Kevin Azzaro, an assistant to Mayor Carlos Molina here.
Azzaro said he didn't know how the city could prepare for more floods, other than asking residents to stay in their homes as much as possible.
Residents here were desperate for news from the dam. However, with no phone service or Internet access anywhere, they relied on bits of news relayed from other residents or city officials.
"The first thing we need is patience," resident Oscar Perez said. "All of Puerto Rico is like this. We gain nothing from being desperate."
Arecibo, on the northern coast and about 80 miles west of San Juan, was one of the last populated cities Maria visited before leaving the island. It also sits very near to where the storm's eye passed over and received some of its more destructive winds. 
But residents here say it's the floodwaters that really ravaged the city, rising up to 10 feet in some places. 
Cities such as Arecibo are feeling some of the sharpest pain in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, since its farther afield from San Juan and hardest for aid and supplies to reach. The storm dealt a devastating blow to the entire island, from Humacao in the southeast to Arecibo in the northwest. 
Like in dozens of other destroyed towns across the island, people here say their main needs are water, fuel, power — and news from the outside world. 
"No power, no water, no information," said Eileen Alcaide, 36, whose home and natural gas distribution business got 8 feet of water. "We only have mud." 
On Sunday, FEMA officials in San Juan were replacing search-and-rescue teams, some of which had worked three weeks straight as a string of strong storms left disaster zones across the Western Hemisphere.
Over the past few days, reconnaissance teams had fanned out across Puerto Rico's coastal cities, such as Toa Baja and Ponce, and were now shifting their focus to the interior of the island, said Karl Lee, of FEMA's Incident Support Command. 

Virginia Task Force 1, a search-and-rescue team attached to FEMA, on Saturday made a helicopter flyover of the island of Culebra, about 20 miles off Puerto Rico's east coast, and assessed it had survived the storm fairly well.
Crews were working on power lines, people were visible on the streets, and some residents were even mowing their lawns, said Rob Schoenberger, who led the mission. No visible mass destruction or casualties, he said.
"If the power company's already out there, that tells you something," he said.
In Arecibo, residents cleaned out mud from flooded homes and wondered how long it will take to get power back. At a shopping center near the highway, residents lined up to fill plastic gallon jugs with fresh water spraying from a hole in a fire hose. 
Azzaro, the mayor's assistant, said residents were rescued from homes amid the devastating floods. But fatalities in the city were relatively low — fewer than 10 at last count, he said. That number could not be independently verified and could rise as emergency personnel begin searching homes.
Gov. Ricardo Rosselló has been in close contact with Molina and state assistance has been good, he said. The mayor has been on the street constantly, meeting with residents and directing aid efforts, Azzaro said. 
"We're doing everything we can," he said.
Jesus Arroyo, 21, took part in the rescue efforts last week, helping residents escape through chest-high water. Some were swept away in the fast-moving floods, but he also believed the fatality count in the city was relatively low, though some of the surrounding towns may have had more deaths.
He said he hoped the world doesn't turn its back on Puerto Rico now.
"We're a small island, but we have a big heart," Arroyo said.


x
Embed
 Jennifer Lopez donates $1 million to Puerto Rico 

 Puerto Ricans try to reach relatives, fly out 

 Puerto Rico is getting help, but it may not be enough 

 Raw: Puerto Rico devastated by Hurricane Maria 

 Raw: Failing dam threatens Puerto Rico 

 Raw: Puerto Ricans assess damage, collect water 

 Hurricanes are rerouting ships to sunnier ports 

 Hurricane Maria leaves path of destruction in Puerto Rico 

 Hurricane Maria batters Puerto Rico 

 Planes flipped like toys at a Puerto Rican airport 

 Hurricane Maria causes damage in Puerto Rico 

 Hurricane Maria leaves Puerto Rico in the dark 

 Streets look like rivers in Puerto Rico from hurricane 

 Hurricane Maria causes major damage in Dominica 

 Hurricane Maria is the strongest storm to hit Puerto Rico in decades 

 See Hurricane Maria from space 

 Hurricane Maria whips Puerto Rico with 145 mph winds 

 Hurricane Maria hits Puerto Rico as category 4 

 Hurricane Maria batters Puerto Rico 

 Hurricane Maria makes first landfall as a category 5 storm 

 Raw: Hurricane Maria blasts Guadeloupe 

 Cat 5 Maria threatens storm-battered Caribbean 

 Category 5 Hurricane Maria menaces Caribbean 
CONNECTTWEET 8 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2ym1VEz
