Ferrari CEO says team will quit Formula 1 if it becomes like NASCAR
By November 3, 2017 1:23 pm  Follow @Nick_Schwartz  
 513 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | November 3, 2017 1:23 pm  Follow @Nick_Schwartz  
Ferrari is the most popular Formula 1 team in the world by an order of magnitude, and the team from Maranello has been the most successful in the history of the sport, with 15 drivers’ titles and 16 constructors’ titles. Despite all that, Ferrari CEO Sergio Marchionne says the company may walk away from Formula 1 entirely if the proposed rule changes for the 2021 season do not suit them.
Earlier this week, the FIA and F1 detailed a number of proposed changes for the long-term direction of the sport, which include technical regulations designed to “improve noise, reduce cost and level the playing field.” Engine specification would change significantly, and a number of parts on F1 cars would become standardized.
Representatives from Mercedes and Renault both seemed unsure of the plans and noted that to redesign the engines currently used will come at a massive price – but Ferrari had the strongest reaction of all, informing new F1 owner Liberty Media that Ferrari will “not play” if the regulations don’t suit them.
Via Autoweek:
“The fact that we now appear to be at odds in terms of the strategic development of this thing, and we see the sport in 2021 taking on a different air, is going to force some decisions on the part of Ferrari,” Marchionne said.
“I understand that Liberty may have taken these into account in coming up with their views, but I think it needs to be absolutely clear that unless we find a set of circumstances, the results of which are beneficial to the maintenance of the brand, and the marketplace, and to the strengthening of the unique position for Ferrari, Ferrari will not play.”

Marchionne went on to say that he doesn’t want Formula 1 to become NASCAR.
“What I do know is that it (F1) has been part of our DNA since the day we were born. It’s not as though we can define ourselves differently,” Marchionne said. “But if we change the sandbox to the point where it becomes an unrecognizable sandbox, I don’t want to play anymore. I don’t want to play NASCAR globally. I just don’t.”
It should be noted that Ferrari has made these sort of threats repeatedly in the past, most recently in 2015. Losing Ferrari would be a immeasurable blow to the sport, so it’s likely that we’ll see a compromise on the regulations in the future.
