The week in Reviewed: Post-CES edition
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this article misstated the rate at which pictures are taken with the Narrative Clip 2.
After our exhaustive (and exhausting) coverage of last week's Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, including our CES Editors' Choice awards, we managed to finally get some rest. But we were back in action this week, and ready to report on the latest news and releases in the world of consumer tech. Among the gadgets we got our hands on were Apple's only slightly updated iPad mini 3, the latest action-cam Hero from GoPro, and an Editors' Choice-worthy fridge from GE.
And in our news and features department, we took a look at a tiny camera that helps you create a snapshot record of your day, a fridge from GE that can brew coffee, a cool drawer for storing your wine, and examined whether Apple can compete with GoPro if it gets into the action-cam market.
The Narrative Clip 2 — the sequel to a successful Kickstarter project — is a camera that attaches to your lapel (or anywhere else) and automatically snaps 2 pictures per minute. Privacy advocates might recoil at the idea, but its intended uses are actually pretty innocent: You can use it to create a handy snapshot record of your day, without having to pause to manually snap a photo.
Apple's newest iPad mini doesn't offer much of an update over the iPad mini 2. While Apple invented the tablet, that doesn't mean it isn't guilty of resting on its laurels sometimes, as the iPad mini 3 merely adds a couple of minor upgrades. That's not to say it's a bad tablet. In fact, it's a very good tablet. But if you already have an iPad mini with Retina Display, it's not worth making the jump to the mini 3.
Apple's recent patent acquisitions suggest that the tech giant will soon be dipping its toes into the action-camera market. But this market is already crowded, and so far, no one has been able to usurp GoPro's throne as the market leader. We took a look at the competition Apple would face if it really is gearing up to make an action cam.

Speaking of GoPro, the company took the 2014 holiday season by storm, as it dropped 3 new models of its best-selling action cameras. Among them, the Hero4 Silver added a first for any GoPro: a built-in touchscreen LCD. This makes the process of reviewing footage and framing shots easier than ever, while still holding onto the "go-anywhere" simplicity of previous models. If you've never bought a GoPro before, this might be the one to get.
There are fridges, and there are coffee makers, and you might've thought their powers would never be combined. Well, you thought wrong. GE announced this week it will be introducing a fridge with a built-in coffee maker, allowing you to brew a hot cup of joe as easily as you fill a glass with ice. Well, almost. With its brewer module that can take K-cups, you can make coffee, tea, or hot chocolate. It'll be the first of its kind in the U.S., and should be available in the fall of this year.

A European company called Plados has made an even more compact version of the wine fridge: the Pandora wine cooler drawer. It won't have enough space for a full-fledged wine collection, but it'll help you store enough wine for an upcoming party. And it'll be especially handy if you've got a small apartment.
This new GE Profile fridge had a lot to live up to: The last one we tested won our Best Fridge of the Year award for 2013. Fortunately, this is an excellent new fridge, even if it doesn't quite live up to the standard set by its predecessor. It's got dual ice-makers, lots of useful features, and a ton of accessible storage space, making it a great choice for nearly any kitchen.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1C8vHdS
