70 for 70: Memorable  quotes on his big birthday
A look back at 70 quotes from interviews, books and tweets that epitomize the man, the brand and the potential president that is Donald J. Trump.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 254 Shares 




Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version misstated when quote #58 was made. It was from 2004.
Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, turns 70 Tuesday. If elected, he'd be the oldest person ever elected to a first term as president.
While his 2016 presidential campaign was his first bid for public office, Trump is hardly new to the public eye. A look back at 70 quotes from interviews, books and tweets that epitomize the man, the brand, the provocateur and the potential president that is Donald J. Trump.
Trump on himself
1) "I'm just a f------ businessman." (Fortune, 2004)
2) “The show is ‘Trump.’ And it is sold-out performances everywhere.” (Playboy, 1990)
3) “Certainly a businessperson on television has never had anything close to this success. It’s like being a rock star. Six people do nothing but sort my mail. People come in and want my secretary Robin’s autograph. If a limo pulls up in front of Trump Tower, hundreds of people gather around, even if it’s not mine. I ask, ‘Can this be a normal life?’ Maybe it’s the power that comes from having the hottest show on television, but people like me much better than they did before The Apprentice. And if you think about it, all I did on the show was fire people, which proves how bad my reputation must have been before this.” (Playboy, 2004)
4) “A lot of people like me, and a lot of people don’t. That’s okay, because my brand is solid and so am I. I can take the negative commentary because the positive impressions are so superior to the reports of the detractors.” (Midas Touch, 2011)
5) “If you don’t tell people about your success, they probably won’t know about it.” (How to Get Rich, 2004)
6) “It’s not that I’ve suffered a knockout blow. Far from it. But after a long winning streak I’m being tested under pressure. I’ve also been in the public eye long enough so that the pendulum has swung, and many of the same media people who once put me on a pedestal now can’t wait for me to fall off. People like a hero, a Golden Boy, but many like a fallen hero even better. That was a fact of life long before I came along, and I can handle it. I know that, whatever happens, I’m a survivor — a survivor of success, which is a very rare thing indeed.” (Trump Surviving at the Top, 1990)
7) “I think Eminem is fantastic, and most people think I wouldn’t like Eminem. And did you know my name is in more black songs than any other name in hip-hop? Black entertainers love Donald Trump. Russell Simmons told me that. Russell said, ‘You’re in more hip-hop songs than any other person,’ like five of them lately. That’s a great honor for me.” (Playboy, 2004)
8) “The truth was that (being on the cover of Time) didn’t feel like much of anything. There I was, looking out from every newsstand in America, and holding an ace of diamonds in my hand. But in my mind all I could hear, once again, was Peggy Lee singing ‘Is That All There Is?’ ” (Trump Surviving At The Top, 1990)
9) "You think I'm going to change? I'm not changing." (Press conference, May 2016)
10) “I play into people’s fantasies. People may not always think big themselves, but they can still get very excited by those who do. That’s why a little hyperbole never hurts. People want to believe that something is the biggest and the greatest and the most spectacular.” (The Art of the Deal, 1987)
11) “Sorry losers and haters, but my I.Q. is one of the highest — and you all know it! Please don’t feel so stupid or insecure. It’s not your fault.” (Twitter, 2013)
12) Show me someone without an ego, and I'll show you a loser — having a healthy ego, or high opinion of yourself, is a real positive in life!” (Facebook, 2013)
13) “Every successful person has a very large ego.” (Playboy, 1990)
14) “Because I’ve been successful, make money, get headlines, and have authored bestselling books, I have a better chance to make my ideas public than do people who are less well known.” (The America We Deserve, 2000)

Trump on foreign policy, negotiating
15) “I’m speaking with myself, No. 1, because I have a very good brain and I’ve said a lot of things. … My primary consultant is myself.” (MSNBC, 2016)
16) “Do you think Putin will be going to The Miss Universe Pageant in November in Moscow — if so, will he become my new best friend?” (Twitter, 2013)
17) "Some people have an ability to negotiate … It's an art you're basically born with. You either have it or you don't." (The Washington Post, 1984)
18) “It would take an hour and a half to learn everything there is to learn about missiles. … I think I know most of it anyway.” (The Washington Post, 1984)
19) “He [Trump] would believe very strongly in extreme military strength. He wouldn’t trust anyone. He wouldn’t trust the Russians; he wouldn’t trust our allies; he’d have a huge military arsenal, perfect it, understand it. Part of the problem is that we’re defending some of the wealthiest countries in the world for nothing. ... We’re being laughed at around the world, defending Japan.” (Playboy, 1990)

Trump on social and domestic issues
20) “It’s like in golf ... A lot of people — I don’t want this to sound trivial — but a lot of people are switching to these really long putters, very unattractive ... It’s weird. You see these great players with these really long putters, because they can’t sink three-footers anymore. And I hate it. I am a traditionalist. I have so many fabulous friends who happen to be gay, but I am a traditionalist.” (The New York Times, 2011)
21) “President Obama spoke for me and every American in his remarks in #Newtown Connecticut.” (Twitter, 2012)
22) "Appreciate the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism, I don't want congrats, I want toughness & vigilance. We must be smart!" (Twitter, 2016)
23) On saying women should be punished for abortion: “I didn’t mean punishment for women like prison. I’m saying women punish themselves. I didn’t want people to think in terms of ‘prison’ punishment. And because of that I walked it back.” (New York Times Magazine, 2016)

Trump on women, minorities
24) “Happy ‪#CincoDeMayo! The best taco bowls are made in Trump Tower Grill. I love Hispanics!” (Twitter, 2016)
25) “"Black guys counting my money! I hate it. The only kind of people I want counting my money are little short guys that wear yarmulkes every day." (Recalled in Trumpd!, 1991)
26) “A well-educated black has a tremendous advantage over a well-educated white in terms of the job market. … [I]f I were starting off today, I would love to be a well-educated black, because I believe they do have an actual advantage.” (NBC News, 1989)
27) "If I told the real stories of my experiences with women, often seemingly very happily married and important women, this book would be a guaranteed best-seller." (The Art of the Comeback, 1997)
28) “I even thought, briefly, about approaching Ivana with the idea of an ‘open marriage.’ But I realized there was something hypocritical and tawdry about such an arrangement that neither of us could live with — especially Ivana. She’s too much of a lady.” (Trump Surviving at the Top, 1990)
29) On Bill Clinton’s sexual assault accusers: “The whole group, it’s truly an unattractive cast of characters — Linda Tripp, Lucianne Goldberg — I mean, this woman — I watch her on television, just vomiting. She is so bad. The whole group — Paula Jones, Lewinsky — it’s just a really unattractive group.” (Fox News, 1998)
30) “Oftentimes when I was sleeping with one of the top women in the world I would say to myself, thinking about me as a boy from Queens, ‘Can you believe what I am getting?’ ” (Think Big: Make it Happen in Business and Life, 2008)
31) “When a man leaves a woman, especially when it was perceived that he has left for a piece of a-- — a good one!— there are 50 percent of the population who will love the woman who was left.” (Vanity Fair, September 1990)
32) “My wife, Ivana, is a brilliant manager. I will pay her one dollar a year and all the dresses she can buy! (Vanity Fair, 1990)
33) On running for president with his history of women: “Can you imagine how controversial I'd be? You think about [Bill Clinton] with the women. How about me with the women? Can you imagine?” (CNBC, 1998)
34) On calling Fox News host Megyn Kelly a bimbo: “Over your life Megyn, you’ve been called a lot worse. Isn’t that right? Wouldn’t you say?” (Fox Broadcast, 2016)

Trump on politics
35) On calling for Obama to resign for not saying "radical Islamic terrorism": "He doesn't get it or he gets it better than anybody understands — it's one or the other and either one is unacceptable." (Fox News, 2016)
36) “We’re living in an age when there are no boundaries left, which is unfortunate for our country. The problem is, we’re going to lose good talent because somebody likes looking at pretty women or pretty men. Somebody’s sex life may mean absolutely nothing to the job at hand, but when the written word gels out, we lose somebody good and the country goes to hell. I know politicians who love women who don’t even want to be known for that — because they might lose the gay vote. OK? If this is the kind of extreme we’re heading toward, we’re really in trouble.” (Playboy, 1990)
37) On Pat Buchanan running in 2000: “He's a Hitler lover. I guess he's an anti-Semite. He doesn't like the blacks, he doesn't like the gays. It's just incredible that anybody could embrace this guy. And maybe he'll get 4 or 5 percent of the vote and it'll be a really staunch right wacko vote.” (NBC, 1999)
38) ''I build the best buildings, and I'm the biggest developer in New York by far … While that's real estate and this is politics, are they really so different?'' (The New York Times, 1999)
39) On Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus: “I call Reince Mr. Switzerland … He’s doing a great job as peacemaker.” (Bloomberg, 2016)
40) On an independent run: "If I am treated fairly that's the way it's going to be, but I want to keep that door open. I have to keep that door open because if something happens where I'm not treated fairly I may very well use that door." (CNN, 2015)
41) On John McCain: “He’s not a war hero… He’s a war hero because he was captured. I like people that weren’t captured, OK?” (YouTube, 2015)
42) “Well, if I ever ran for office, I’d do better as a Democrat than as a Republican — and that’s not because I’d be more liberal, because I’m conservative. But the working guy would elect me. He likes me.” (Playboy, 1990)

Trump on the press
43) “Sometimes journalist attacks have little to do with the pursuit of truth. They are personal vendettas disguised as objective reporting." (Trump Surviving at the Top, 1990)
44) “One thing I’ve learned about the press is that they’re always hungry for a good story, and the more sensational the better … The point is that if you are a little different, or a little outrageous, or if you do things that are bold or controversial, the press is going to write about you.” (The Art of the Deal, 1987)
45) “I think the thing I’m worst at is managing the press.” (The New Yorker, 1997)

Trump on business
46) “In general, my philosophy is to stay as close to home as possible. Travel is time-consuming and, in my opinion, boring — especially compared with the fun I have doing deals in my office. I can never understand people who say that if they had a lot of money they would spend their time traveling. It’s just not my thing.” (Trump Surviving at The Top, 1990)
47) “I do whine because I want to win, and I’m not happy about not winning, and I am a whiner, and I keep whining and whining until I win.” (CNN, 2015)
48) “My attitude is if somebody’s willing to pay me $225,000 to make a speech, it seems stupid not to show up. You know why I’ll do it? Because I don’t think anyone’s ever been paid that much.” (The New Yorker, 1997)

Trump on his appearance, handshakes
49) “The concept of shaking hands is absolutely terrible, and statistically I’ve been proven right. Many studies have found that you catch colds and who knows what else from shaking hands. A guy walked into my office two weeks ago. He shook my hand, hugged me, sat down and said, ‘I have the worst flu I’ve ever had.’ The guy looked like he was dying, and he’d just shaken my hand. I said, ‘Why did you shake my hand?’ People don’t have a clue. It’s disgusting. Then he wanted to shake my hand when I left. I said, ‘Look, you just told me you’re dying of the flu and I’m supposed to shake your hand?’ But honestly, I don’t feel crippled by it. I just wash my hands.” (Playboy, 2004)
50) “Some business executives believe in a firm handshake. I believe in no handshake. It is a terrible practice. So often, I see someone who is obviously sick, with a bad cold or the flu, who approaches me and says, ‘Mr. Trump, I would like to shake your hand.’ It’s a medical fact that this is how germs are spread.” (Trump: How to Get Rich, 2004)
51) “I will never change this hairstyle, I like it. It fits my head. Those who criticize me are only losers and envy people. And it is not a wig, it’s my hair. Do you want to touch it?” (Forbes, 2014)
52) “I get up, take a shower and wash my hair. Then I read the newspapers and watch the news on television, and slowly the hair dries. It takes about an hour. I don’t use a blow-dryer. Once it’s dry I comb it. Once I have it the way I like it — even though nobody else likes it — I spray it and it’s good for the day.” (Playboy, 2004)
53) “Look at my hands. … My hands are normal hands. During a debate, he was losing, and he said, ‘Oh, he has small hands and therefore, you know what that means.’ This was not me. This was Rubio that said, ‘He has small hands and you know what that means.’ OK? So, he started it. So, what I said a couple of days later … and what happened is, I was on line shaking hands with supporters, and one of the supporters got up and he said, ‘Mr. Trump, you have strong hands. You have good-sized hands.’ And then another one would say, ‘You have great hands, Mr. Trump, I had no idea.’ I said, ‘What do you mean?’ He said, ‘I thought you were, like, deformed, and I thought you had small hands.’ I had 50 people. … I mean, people were writing, ‘How are Mr. Trump’s hands?’ My hands are fine. You know, my hands are normal. Slightly large, actually. In fact, I buy a slightly smaller than large glove, OK?” (The Washington Post, 2016)

Trump on his wealth, fame
54) "I like it, but I don't need it. I like it and I feel I should have it and I think it would be inappropriate for me not to have it. When people see Trump Tower, I'm not sure it would be appropriate for me to hop in a 1953 Chevy and drive away. If you walked up and saw a horrible apartment with a seven-foot ceiling and shag carpeting or something you'd say, 'This is unbelievable.' So I don't know, I don't know. I don't do it because I need it. I do it for other reasons." (The Washington Post, 1984)
55) “Some people aren’t meant to be rich. It’s like when Babe Ruth was the greatest home run hitter. There had never been anybody like him, and his teammates would ask, ‘Babe, Babe, how do you hit the long ball?’ And he’d say, ‘I don’t know, man. I just swing at it.’ I see it like that. It’s just something you have, something you’re born with. Many people don’t have the ability to be rich because they’re too lazy or they don’t have the desire or the stick-to-itiveness. It’s a talent. Some people have a talent for piano. Some people have a talent for raising a family. Some people have a talent for golf. I just happen to have a talent for making money.” (Playboy, 2004)
56) “I probably visited Mar-a-Lago, my 118-room house in Palm Beach, no more than two dozen times in the years I’ve owned it. As for my yacht, The Trump Princess, it is a dazzling trophy and a terrific business tool, but it never really became part of my personal life. For me, you see, the important thing is the getting ... not the having.” (Trump Surviving at the Top, 1990)
57) “I like the feeling of getting out of a lift, stepping into Fifth Avenue and hearing someone screaming ‘Trump! Trump! You’re fired!’ Nobody thought I was going to be big on television, and then I dominated the ratings and my name was on everybody’s lips. But being a celebrity is good 70% of the time — it gives you fame, money and power. But I also enjoy some privacy once and while.” (Forbes, 2014)
58) “I’ve never used an ATM. Of course, I always have access to money, and I have hundreds of checking accounts. But I don’t handle cash a lot. When I go to restaurants, especially since The Apprentice, I always get free meals — 'Oh please, Mr. Trump, there’s no charge'—even if I’m there with 10 or 15 people. The sad part is, if I were someone who needed money I’d have to pay.” (Playboy, 2004)
59) “There has always been a display of wealth and always will be, until the depression comes, which it always does. And let me tell you, a display is a good thing. It shows people that you can be successful. It can show you a way of life. Dynasty did it on TV. It's very important that people aspire to be successful. The only way you can do it is if you look at somebody who is.” (Playboy, 1990)
60) “I have glitzy casinos because people expect it ... Glitz works in Atlantic City ... And in my residential buildings I sometimes use flash, which is a level below glitz.” (The New Yorker, 1997)
61) “And while I can't honestly say I need an 80-foot living room, I do get a kick out of having one.” (The Art of the Deal, 1987)

Trump on dealing with people
62) “When someone crosses you, my advice is ‘Get even!’ That is not typical advice, but it is real-life advice. If you do not get even, you are just a schmuck! When people wrong you, go after those people, because it is a good feeling and because other people will see you doing it. I love getting even. I get screwed all the time. I go after people, and you know what? People do not play around with me as much as they do with others. They know that if they do, they are in for a big fight. Always get even. Go after people that go after you. Don’t let people push you around. Always fight back and always get even. It’s a jungle out there, filled with bullies of all kinds who will try to push you around. If you’re afraid to fight back people will think of you as a loser, a ‘schmuck!’ They will know they can get away with insulting you, disrespecting you, and taking advantage of you. Don’t let it happen! Always fight back and get even.” (Trump: Think Big, 2007)
63) “If someone attacks you, do not hesitate. Go for the jugular.” (Trump: Think Big, 2007)
64) “It makes me feel so good to hit 'sleazebags' back — much better than seeing a psychiatrist (which I never have!)" (Twitter, November 19, 2012)

Trump the parent
65) “I’ve never been the kind of guy who takes his son out to Central Park to play catch, but I think I’m a good father.” (Playboy, 2004)
66) “I like kids. I mean, I won’t do anything to take care of ‘em. I’ll supply funds, and she’ll take care of the kids.” (The Howard Stern Show, 2005)
67) “My kids are extremely well adjusted. But I wonder what they think when they walk into Mar-a-Lago and see ceilings that rise to heights that nobody’s ever seen before. And when my daughter’s date picks her up at Trump Tower in a few years and sees the living room, how will he feel when he takes her out and tries to impress her with a studio apartment?” (Playboy, 1990)
68) “She does have a very nice figure. I’ve said if Ivanka weren’t my daughter, perhaps I’d be dating her.” (ABC’s The View, 2006)

Trump on The Apprentice
69) “Every time I walk outside, somebody says it, and the funny thing is, everybody thinks I’m hearing it for the first time. 'You’re fired!' I get it literally a hundred times a day. Little kids come up to me and say, 'Mr. Trump, you’re fired' and then run away laughing. It became a mania. YOU’RE FIRED hats and T-shirts sell like hotcakes. It’s a beautiful phrase. It’s harsh, it’s ugly, it’s mean, but it’s concise and gets the job done fast, which is why I love it.” (Playboy, 2004)
70) “I don’t think so. I wouldn’t have had the patience these contestants have had. I also don’t know that I’d make the tremendous commitment necessary to make it work. I mean, it’s possible that winning The Apprentice would have been my dream when I was 25, but these kids go through hell, and I don’t know if I’d be willing to do the same.” (Playboy, 2004)

 President-elect Donald Trump and his wife, Melania, step off a plane upon arrival at Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland on Jan. 19, 2017, ahead of the inauguration. Here's a look back at his career and presidential campaign. Mandel Ngan, AFP/Getty Images
