Oregon's country-to-coast tasting trail
A few years ago, accessing the Willamette Valley, the state’s renowned wine region known largely for Pinot Noir, required only a 30- to 40-minute drive. Today, with the population growth in Portland and its commensurate traffic, on a bad day, the commute could last two hours. Thus, rather than use the city as a base for exploring wine country, spend a few days amidst the vines to relax. After all, less time driving means more time tasting. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 In other words, there aren’t a lot of great places to stay. Rather than a middling B&B, why not wake up to the chirp of birds, brew a pot of Stumptown coffee, and sit on your patio watching the sun peak crest the vineyard? Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 One of the most exciting projects in the Valley, Craft Wine Company founder and winemaker Chad Stock makes close to 30 experimental wines in Carlton. He sources unusual grapes from diverse sites to make atypical blends and single-varietal bottlings. Rather than work formulaically or even commercially, he embraces creativity – a virtue of the craft beer business that’s effectively been eschewed in the rather conservative Willamette wine world. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 For example, he bottled a wine with heightened volatile acidity, tried inoculating another with Brettanomyces, and aged another under flor. For all his offbeat techniques, the majority of the wines are eminently drinkable, thoughtful – and fun. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 As the author of 'The Great American Ale Trail,' he had the unique opportunity, while covering breweries in all 50 states, to taste a range of styles and techniques. Such broad and deep access ultimately pushed him away from the abiding popularity of the IPA to the farmhouse/saison realm, which offers greater opportunity for creativity and complexity. Carly Diaz
 While Brooks Wine makes Pinot Noir (you must, to survive), the focus is largely on Riesling. The 20-acre, biodynamically farmed vineyard in the Eola-Amity Hills sub-region of Willamette was founded by Portlander Jimi Brooks in 1998. Despite his unfortunate passing, with the assistance of his sister Janie Brooks and his best friend and now winemaker, Chris Williams, the winery has continued delivering memorable wines under his name. Cheryl Juetten
 As you head south out of town towards Salem, a small sign offering a cheese tasting pops up on the right. You’ll want to turn in. Willamette Valley Cheese produces a staggering number of cheeses from classic cheddars to Havarti, Gouda, raw milks and even flavored versions like spicy garlic. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 The assistant will dole out every single cheese to every person who wants a taste, for free. To go through the entire line-up could take 40 minutes, and you’ll start tasting at whichever point she’s at in the roster. If you’re curious about something in particular, just ask. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 Every Oregon road trip demands a few days of tramping through forests and circling pretty lakes. While options abound -- signs for national and state parks seem to pop up at every 20-mile marker -- much of the overnight park access is limited to RV hookups and primitive campsites. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 Alcoholic drinks consist of local beers and wine. On Wednesdays, breweries come out for a tap takeover and cookout. A cocktail lounge inside the main lodge stays open for the younger, evening set, although on a recent visit, the clientele was composed primarily of early-to-bed, early-to-rise families. AJ Meeker, courtesy of Suttle Lodge
 Oh, and there are lots of breweries. At around 40-50 minutes from Suttle, depending on summer traffic, Bend makes a great beer-crawl day trip. Plus, it’s a beautiful drive past horse farms backed by snow-capped mountains and through the quirky town of Sisters. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 Established in 2011, The Ale Apothecary’s brews will taste familiar to wine lovers, especially those who appreciate the product of natural processes. Paul Arney’s beers deliver wine-like complexity (and prices at $35 for a 750 ml), which is likely derived from the wild, open-top oak barrel fermentations. This unpredictable old-world method results in delicious surprises that rarely can be duplicated. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 But as his beers earned a dedicated following (recently named a top 25 craft brewer in the U.S.), he and his partners realized a proper facility was in order; hence, the tasting room on Century Drive in Bend, opened this year. These beers are rare, so pack a few bottles in your luggage. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 Not one single seat can be found inside the former AAMCO transmission shop on a Friday at 1 p.m. Servers loaded with beer flights and platters of food cut through crowds, while outside, a second line forms at a tap bar servicing picnic tables packed with families. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 Boneyard brewery, started by Tony Lawrence in 2010, is not a stumble-and-find kind of place. Set inside a former auto shop on the back streets of Bend, Ore., the tasting room is only identifiable by the handful of congenial people spilled out front. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 The vibe is firmly local over beer tourist, which the folks hanging out will eagerly attest to. Beers rotate, as usual, and run the gamut from a session, pils, pale and red ales, to several IPAs, the primary focus. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 Upon departing Suttle Lake, head for Smith Rock State Park in Terrebonne. Misery Ridge is the hike to take, as it leads you up a zig zagging path to the summit for exceptional views of the surrounding valley and peaks in the distance. A steep hike down reveals a peaceful riverside walk that circles below the peak and returns you to the car park. It’s 3.7 miles total and a great way to work off a few beer calories. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 From Smith Rock, the drive back to Portland takes two and a half to three hours, depending on traffic. You’ll skirt high desert farms, getting a taste of Eastern Oregon’s topography, before dropping back into the forest surrounding Mount Hood. Rather than carry on to the coast, take an overnight break in the city. After all, Portland does lead the state, by a mile, in creative dining and drinking options, including several newish ones. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 The newly revamped Duniway Portland, a Hilton hotel, delivers a boutique lifestyle vibe with its lobby coffee shop and swanky cocktail bar. On the lower level, the spacious Jackrabbit restaurant, which also provides in-room dining, leaves an offal taste in the mouths of diners. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 Husband and wife team John and Ksenija Kostic House have their own label, Ovum Wines, which is focused on naturally produced Riesling and Gewürztraminer. Fellow collaborator Jeff Vejr, owner and winemaker of Golden Cluster, also pours his wine at the bar. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
 The rest of the list features reasonably priced older vintages by the glass, plus wines on tap, grower Champagne by the glass, vermouth and sherry. Beer and cider are also on-hand, including Ovum's collaboration with Upright Brewing and the Wild Perry from Art & Science. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
Last SlideNext Slide

Oregon is a tale of the outdoors. It is a land of both grand and intimate landscapes, from the widest desert vistas to the tiniest tide pools. It is a place where residents’ time is measured not by meetings nor to-do lists, but by the length of bike track left in the mud, the miles of shoreline paddled, the layers of dirt caked high on hiking boots. The vast wilderness, from coast to countryside, presents the perfect conditions for dreaming while awake, for creativity needs space to flourish. The resulting Oregonian ingenuity drives not only a way of life, one of self-reliance and fierce preservation of the environment, but much of the beer, wine and food world, too. Which is why a long, slow drive across this sparsely-populated state is one of America’s last great road trips. With excellent road conditions largely devoid of cars but rife with wilderness, wineries and breweries, you may just want to stay forever.
While the following itinerary took 10 days to complete, the pace was admittedly relaxed. Driving a figure-eight, all journeys begin in Portland before heading south to Willamette wine country. After a few days of tasting Pinot, Riesling (and beer!), push on through Mt. Hood to the lakes, forests and breweries of Central Oregon and Bend. Circling up past Smith Rock and the high desert, spend a night in the city before departing for the coast. Starting north in Astoria, known as “little SF,” skirt the ocean down 101 past Cannon, until alighting on Pacific City. You’ll take in restaurants serving fresh-caught seafood -- or attempt to catch your own — all paired with local beer, wine, and lots and lots of coffee.
While this missive extolls the virtues of this Pacific Northwest state, it does not advocate for making a reckless move west based on one joyful road trip. Committing to a relocation while in the throes of a summer romance is like marrying a new lover after a wild weekend fling. Oregon’s summers are seductive. It’s easy to fall in love. But they’re short.
June through September is the best time to visit if weather is a prime concern. Oregon is the first of 14 states in the path of the highly-anticipated solar eclipse on August 21. Expect crowds and high prices, but total darkness for 10 minutes may offer enough drama to warrant it. You be the judge.
Browse the photo galleries for the ultimate tasting trail through Oregon's great outdoors, from Portland to Bend above, and Astoria to Pacific City below.

 Highway 101 offers stunning viewpoints on the coast. Lauren Mowery, for USA TODAY
