Padres say hacked account led to bizarre posts about free-agent target Eric Hosmer
By January 25, 2018 12:47 pm  Follow @andyj0seph  
 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 25, 2018 12:47 pm  Follow @andyj0seph  
Royals first baseman Eric Hosmer is one of the top remaining free agents left on the market with both the Royals and Padres vying for the All-Star’s services.
So, as you could imagine, MLB fans were confused when the Padres’ official social media accounts posted cryptic photos and tweets about Hosmer before deleting them early Thursday morning.
 #Padres posted a picture on Instagram of Eric Hosmer. Also tweeted stay tuned… 
 Both have now been deleted.#Padres must be close to either signing Hosmer, or firing their social media operators. pic.twitter.com/UcP2U0PUqi
 — Mickey Koke (@mickeykoke) January 25, 2018
 From earlier. pic.twitter.com/feCCF61QTe
 — Mickey Koke (@mickeykoke) January 25, 2018
According to USA TODAY Sports, the Padres had offered Hosmer a seven-year, $140 million deal. The Padres’ posts suggesting that Hosmer had signed with San Diego weren’t accurate, though.
A team spokesperson told The San Diego Union-Tribune that their accounts had been hacked.
 Padres team official: The club's social media accounts, which posted and deleted Eric Hosmer items late last night, were hacked. As of now, it is unclear how that happened. Although teams run their respective accounts, they technically are assets controlled by MLB Advanced Media.
 — Dennis Lin (@sdutdennislin) January 25, 2018
Beat writer Dennis Lin pointed out that MLB Advanced Media also has access to every team account, and the Padres added that MLB Cybersecurity is investigating how the Hosmer posts were sent from their accounts.
 Padres statement regarding Eric Hosmer posts: "The Padres social media accounts were inappropriately accessed last night, and messages that were inaccurate and unauthorized were posted. MLB Cybersecurity is now investigating the matter, and we apologize for any confusion."
 — Dennis Lin (@sdutdennislin) January 25, 2018
See, the NBA isn’t the only sport with crazy free-agency drama. Hosmer also has a $147 million deal on the table from the Royals, according to USA TODAY Sports.
