In 'Together We Rise,' the Women's March organizers write their own history
CLOSE

 Hundreds of thousands of people marched in Washington D.C., and in over 600 'sister marches' across the world in solidarity. Time

History has a bad habit of denying women credit for remarkable work. Organizers of last year's Women's March on Washington were determined not to suffer the same fate, so they've written history themselves, giving voice to the women who channeled pain, forfeited sleep and risked careers to birth a revolution.
Dedicated to the "women, documented and undocumented: the daughters, the mothers, the caregivers, the workers, the trans warriors, the witches, the artists, the refugees, the leaders," the new book Together We Rise: Behind the Scenes at the Protest Heard Around the World by the organizers of the Women’s March and Condé Nast chronicles the genesis, execution and immediate aftermath of the largest single-day protest in U.S. history on Jan. 21, 2017.
"Unless women tell our own story, men of privilege will always rewrite history in their favor. We created this book so that no historian, pundit, or politician could claim what was ours. And what was yours," the Women’s March organizers write.
Rise (Dey Street, 320 pp., ★★★½ out of four) is a testament to the power of women, a rousing reflection on the effort required to stir millions of people across every state in the country and on seven continents to raise voices and challenge a new administration they believed threatened their fundamental rights.
Jamia Wilson, executive director of the Feminist Press, weaves together interviews from 30 people at the center of the mass demonstration with voices of attendees and spectators. The book’s structure — narration that shifts voices every few paragraphs among activists, artists, politicians and protesters — reflects the spirit of inclusiveness organizers hoped would define the march. It incorporates a stunning visual history, with stirring portraits of defiance and sweeping crowd shots that capture the scope of dissent in sea after sea of pink knit hats.
Rise doesn’t attempt to disguise the racial tensions that haunted the march, amplified by an election in which 53% of white women voted for Donald Trump and 94% of black women voted for Hillary Clinton. Organizers admit it was difficult to build unity, especially in those tender early days. The account also underscores that the march’s most notable faces — co-chairs Bob Bland, Tamika Mallory, Carmen Perez and Linda Sarsour — were far from its only architects.

As word of the protest spread, the rallying cry became, “How can I help?” It took a mighty network of women and men — some lifelong activists, some who had never organized before — to turn anguish into action.
"A 'leaderful' movement is a movement where there isn't a single person whose vision creates the strategy, but rather many people who can be visionary leaders," writes Janaye Ingram, the march’s director of logistics. "Ideas and power converge into something more powerful than what one leader could do on their own. It is like the force of a fist vs. an individual finger."
Together We Rise is a story about resistance, but it’s also about the convictions that fuel it. And, as the authors of this book so ardently hope, sustains it. 

 Thousands of attendees fill the streets during the Women's March on Washington in Washington, DC on Jan. 21, 2017, one day after the inauguration of President-elect Donald J. Trump.. Jasper Colt, USA TODAY
