Warrick Dunn: 'It's time for Jameis Winston to be what everyone wants'
By January 23, 2018 9:30 am ET  Follow @BonnieMott_  
 246 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 23, 2018 9:30 am ET  Follow @BonnieMott_  
Former Tampa Bay Buccaneers running back Warrick Dunn recently shared his thoughts on Jameis Winston in an interview with Greg Auman of the Tampa Bay Times, where Dunn made it incredibly clear that he believes the 24-year-old quarterback has an very bright future in the NFL.
Dunn said that despite being a turnover machine and making numerous costly mistakes throughout his first three seasons, one key to Winston’s future success is him remaining focused and putting an end to his stubborn knack for taking on too many roles and doing too much at once.
“I still think he’s talented but it’s time for him to take that step, that leap, Dunn said, according to Greg Auman of the Tampa Bay Times. “It’s time for him to be what everyone wants him to be, to make sure he’s consistent.”
Dunn added that all the intangible qualities are there, but Winston must start executing in order to lead this team to the playoffs after a decade-long postseason drought.
“We know he’s a vocal leader, but I think now, people don’t want to hear the vocal as much; they want to see the action on the field,” Dunn emphasized. “I think he has an opportunity to take over games. He’s going to work hard this offseason, as he did last year. Having the head coach and coordinator with him again gives him an opportunity to really start taking himself to that next level, being in the upper echelon of the quarterbacks in this league.”
Winston has already seen a ton of success in the league. After all, he has already made a Pro Bowl appearance and became the first quarterback in NFL history to throw for over 4,000 yards in his first two seasons under center. Dunn believes if he can work on addressing the areas of concern this offseason and build better chemistry with his receivers then the offense can finally live up to its potential and be among the best in the league.
Like this article?
Sign up for the Bucs Wire email newsletter to get our top stories in your inbox every morning
Success
 Thanks for signing up.
 You'll be waking up a little more awesome tomorrow. 
Whoa!
 Something went wrong.
