2017 James Beard Foundation Awards announced
The 2017 James Beard Foundation Awards were announced Monday evening in Chicago. Lola Haze, BFAnyc.com
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay

Last SlideNext Slide

Monday marked the third year Chicago played host to the James Beard Foundation Awards, the annual spectacle honoring the nation’s culinary leaders that is likened to the Oscars of the food world — and for good reason. After all, there’s black-tie garb, parties and a ceremony that keeps people in their seats for upwards of three-and-a-half hours. It’s for that reason that this year’s host, Modern Family actor Jesse Tyler Ferguson, issued a friendly suggestion: “Okay nominees, so just remember — the best speeches are like an amuse-bouche: a tiny bite that is complex, beautiful and leaves us wanting more.”
The advice came in handy for the evening’s 20-plus categories, including Outstanding Pastry Chef. It was Ghaya Oliveira of DANIEL who took home the medal, and who kept things short and — well — sweet.
“This is very emotional,” she said before announcing a round of thanks to her son, restaurant team and chef Daniel Boulud. “That’s all — I’m used to making pastries more than I am speeches.”
Other nominees who had the chance to greet the podium included Outstanding Chef winner Michael Solomonov of Zahav in Philadelphia and Outstanding Restaurateur winner Stephen Starr of Starr Restaurants in Philadelphia. The Best Chef category is broken into 10 regional subcategories, and winners included Greg Vernick of Vernick Food & Drink in Philadelphia, Andrew Taylor and Mike Wiley of Eventide Oyster Co. in Portland, Maine, Kevin Nashan of Sidney Street Café in St. Louis, Marco Canora of Hearth in New York, Greg Denton and Gabrielle Quiñónez Denton of Ox in Portland, Ore., Rebecca Wilcomb of Herbsaint in New Orleans, Steven Satterfield of Miller Union in Atlanta, Hugo Ortega of Hugo’s in Houston, Corey Lee of Benu in San Francisco, and Sarah Grueneberg of Monteverde in Chicago — an exciting win for the Top Chef alum and first-time nominee.
“It feels like the best day of my life,” she said. “A James Beard Award is validation for all of the hard work that goes into opening and operating a restaurant, and receiving one tonight makes me feel like I’ve hit that goal.”
Another person to hit that goal was fellow Chicagoan Rick Bayless and his team at Topolobampo, which won for Outstanding Restaurant. The win came as a surprise for the Second City staple, which has been up for nine nominations in this category and Outstanding Service since it opened its doors in 1989. “My wife and I opened this restaurant to bring the heart and soul that people had shared with us in Mexico and share it with people in this country,” said Bayless. “The flavors that carry through the best on the plate, we’ve found, are the flavors that we create as cooks when we are living our own truth.”
Browse the photos above for some of the award winners and see more from past food awards below.
