First Monday: What's on tap this month on TV and in movies and books - USATODAY.com
Calendar

PBS
 Lifeguard Nicole Moro of Seattle holds up her paycheck in an episode of PBS' "Biz Kid$."
EnlargeClose
PBS
Lifeguard Nicole Moro of Seattle holds up her paycheck in an episode of PBS' "Biz Kid$."
April 6: Metro area employment report for February from Labor Department
April 13: Senate holds hearing on veterans' employment and the transition from battlefield to workforce
April 15: March consumer price index from Labor Department
April 25-29: Among those reporting quarterly earnings this week are Coca-Cola, Caterpillar, ExxonMobil, Microsoft
April 26-27: The Fed's policymaking committee meets
April 28: Commerce Department releases its first estimate of first-quarter GDP
WATCH, LISTEN & READ
By Michelle Archer, Special for USA TODAY
Biz Kid$
PBS; Sunday; check local listings or bizkids.com for times.
The fun financial-literacy show that features kids teaching other kids about money and business returns this week with a fresh crop of eight episodes.
First to air will be a show focused on taxes, specifically, what they do and why your cellphone bill seems to include so many.
The American Tax Cheat
CNBC; April 14; 9 p.m. ET
Did you file your income-tax return yet?
Let's hope so, because if everyone who owed money to the IRS actually paid it, the USA wouldn't have a budget deficit, according to CNBC correspondent Becky Quick's tax-cheat special.
Among other surprises from the one-hour program: One in 10 Americans polled think it's OK to cheat on taxes; tax evaders cost the government $300 billion each year; and just about 1% of Americans' returns are audited.
Quick also pays a visit to an IRS forensics lab and covers high-profile people who have been caught cheating.
Also on TV this month:
Storage-unit scavengers Ton Jones and Allen Haff return for a second season as the infinitely watchable Auction Hunters (Spike TV; Tuesday; 10 p.m. ET/PT).
Three friends from college work, live and consume substances together in the raunchy new scripted comedy Workaholics (Comedy Central; Wednesday; 10:30 p.m.).
And speaking of men who sometimes behave badly, the crab-fishing crews of Deadliest Catch (Discovery Channel; April 12; 9 p.m. ET/PT) have set sail for a seventh season.
Frontline (PBS; April 19; 9 p.m. ET/PT) follows up on last year's College, Inc episode with Educating Sergeant Pantzke, a look at how and why for-profit colleges are recruiting so many new veterans.
AT THE MOVIES
Pom Wonderful Presents: The Greatest Movie Ever Sold
Sony Pictures Classics; PG-13; April 22 (Los Angeles, New York)
It's rather ingenious that Morgan Spurlock (Super Size Me) made a Wonderful (ahem) documentary about product placement financed entirely by product placement.
By filming the process of pitching The Greatest Movie Ever Sold to advertisers — $1 million bought the rights to be in the title — and cutting in interviews with insiders such as well-known directors, branding experts and agencies, Spurlock has concocted a meta-movie that's a rare mix of funny, eye-opening and self-aware.
CHECK IT OUT
By Gary H. Rawlins, USA TODAY
Coffee with:Success magazine profiles Starbucks founder Howard Schultz, who returned as CEO in 2007 on a mission to "rekindle the emotion" that built the coffee retailer. When Schultz resigned in 2000, the company seemed healthy, as Starbucks shops "popped up on busy corners across the nation," writes John Ostdick. But an unforgiving economy and several strategic mistakes took their toll, prompting Schultz's return. Schultz knew instinctively he had to engage employees in an open and honest way and ask for personal accountability in return. His personal investment paid off in the form of reborn loyalty.
Changing guard:Google investors would be wise to buckle up for the wild ride ahead, writes Steven Levy in Wired magazine. With Larry Page back as CEO Monday, expect Google to take more moon shots, Levy says. Known for his idiosyncratic urges, along with co-founder Sergey Brin, Page takes over from Eric Schmidt, who provided "adult supervision" for 10 years. While Page's ideas tilt toward the fantastic, investors can take comfort in knowing that his vision always encompassed the commercial.
A learning experience: The "F' word uttered in corner offices is not always the dirty four-letter one. To Harvard Business Review, it's the seven-letter one spelled F-A-I-L-U-R-E. Too often, managers gag on the word as if admitting it conveys incompetence or dereliction. Acting as therapist, the magazine puts managers on the couch, hoping to reprogram childhood conceptions of failure to get executives to understand, learn from and recover from awful outcomes.
If you build it …: Angolan journalist Rafael Marques de Morais keeps a close watch on Chinese direct investment in his homeland and doesn't like what he sees. Writing in World Affairs, De Marais lambasts shoddily constructed hospitals, roads and schools. He deplores the practice of Chinese companies employing thousands of their countrymen and a handful of Angolans on projects. But De Marais acknowledges that some responsibility for what's happening goes to Angola's institutionalized culture of corruption, incompetence and disregard for public safety.
5 QUESTIONS FOR CHUCK LEAVELL
By Wendy Koch, USA TODAY
Talk about an interesting life: Chuck Leavell, 58, a renowned keyboardist, has spent decades touring the world with the Rolling Stones, Allman Brothers, George Harrison, Eric Clapton— you name it.
But when he's not playing rock until the wee hours of the morning, he's getting on a tractor at sunrise to work his 2,500-acre plantation near Macon, Ga., which he's turned into a nature preserve. He's testified before Congress on forestry issues, and in January 2009 he co-founded Mother Nature Network, an environmental website. 

Chuck Leavell, rock and roll legend, keyboardist and musical director for the Rolling Stones.
He's penned songs as well as books. He released his latest book, Growing a Better America, on March 24.
Q: You say that seeing Ray Charles in concert when you were 13 prompted your musical career. What inspired you to also become an environmental entrepreneur?
A: My wife and her family have been connected to the land for generations as farmers. … In 1981, she inherited some property from her grandmother, and it became our responsibility to carry on what was a generational stewardship of the land. 
We launched Mother Nature Network at a period of time that was tumultuous economically. But my partner Joel Babbitt and myself had a vision. There were a lot of environmental websites out there but none that we felt was broad enough and all-encompassing enough. … We're now the second-most-visited environmental website in the world.
Q: How do you and your wife of 38 years, Rose Lane, try to lower your own carbon footprint?
A: We recently renovated a third of our home — used the very best insulation. … When we have an HVAC system that needs to be replaced, we use the most efficient we can find. When our appliances run out, we use Energy Star appliances. 
Q: You discuss many environmental issues in your new book. What's the best way for the U.S. to address them?
A: Getting away from fossil fuels would be good. Let's get to those renewable energy sources we continue to talk about. We need to incentivize companies. It needs to be good business to be green. 
Q: Turning to music, what are your most memorable moments in decades of touring with famous musicians such as Mick Jagger?
A: I've had so many incredible memories on tour. Back in 1973, the Allman Brothers played Watkins Glen (N.Y.) to over 600,000 people and broke the record previously held by Woodstock. Recently on the Stones tour, we played in Rio to over a million and a half people. 
The thing that really comes to mind was in 1990. We were touring Europe, and the (Berlin) Wall had come down in '89. There was just this incredible feeling of freedom throughout that part of the world. One in particular that stands out was Prague. We had 126,000 people at our concert. The posters read: "Tanks roll out, Stones roll in."
Q: When you're home alone, what do you play on the piano? Do you sing?
A: Sometimes I try to blank my thoughts and improvise, just play what my fingers want to play. Other times … I might practice or do some technical exercises. …Yeah, I sing. It's interesting because I've always ended up in bands with great lead singers. … I do have a voice, and I do sing, but maybe not as well as some people I've worked with. 
For more information about reprints & permissions, visit our FAQ's. To report corrections and clarifications, contact Standards Editor Brent Jones. For publication consideration in the newspaper, send comments to letters@usatoday.com. Include name, phone number, city and state for verification. To view our corrections, go to corrections.usatoday.com.
Posted | Updated
