Readers sound off: Outrage over Kevin Spacey is misplaced
The problem is Spacey's already been convicted. No evidence, no testimony, no trial. All it takes today is an accusation and it's over. Welcome to Salem! Grab your torch.
— Mike Sprang
#tellustoday Vague stance. It punishes the entire crew, including Wright, for the mistakes of one man. Show should've gone on without him.
— UmmangSB (@UmmangSB) October 31, 2017
Think about it, folks. Hollywood highlights gays and perverts in their films, yet when some of their own do the same in the real world, they are appalled.
— Kathy Masek
#Tellusatoday I congratulate Netflix on their quick and decisive response. Hopefully, this will empower those who have suffered to report it
— Jeff Ostach (@JeffOstach) October 31, 2017
The stark contrast between Democrats and Republicans becomes clearer every day.
Liberals and progressives have no tolerance for predators. Harvey Weinstein had to go, and now we learned Spacey is exiting as well.
Republicans, on the other hand, elected their sexual predator to the highest office in the land, continued to stand by him even after he sympathized with white supremacists, and now they tell us that every woman who reports that Trump did what he bragged about is lying. 
To think, Republicans used to call themselves the "moral majority."
— Ken Brockington
While I never watched the show, I feel sorry for all the behind-the-scenes employees who are now adversely affected by this mess.
— BlueJay_NE (@TANickMA) October 31, 2017
This is news from a long time ago. Does this really take away the great work Spacey has done in film or television through the years? I don't think so.
Some of us probably did stupid stuff in our younger days that probably could have gotten us arrested, so everybody get off your self-righteous soapbox and move on.
— Joseph Pintar 
The worst of us has always found refuge in privilege; we are fighting back now in a language they understand: capital. #tellusatoday
— VincerettaChiles (@VeniVidiViciLaw) October 31, 2017
I have to ask ... why was an obviously unsupervised 14-year-old at a Broadway party in the first place? Where were his parents?
— Rowan Severman
Do the right thing! I will cancel my subscription if @netflix airs season 6 or the Gore movie which also stars Spacey. #tellusatoday
— S Campbell (@campbellslc) October 31, 2017
30 years ago? Trump and Weinstein molested women recently. But Spacey is gay so that makes it much worse. Give me a break!
— Andy Stanton
To join the conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
Welcome to a sneak preview of a new USA TODAY experience!
