50 state road trip: Free tourist attractions around the USA
Alaska: It’s hard to beat America’s last frontier when it comes to free outdoor activities. Case in point, Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve’s borders span 3.3 million acres — that’s not a typo. For an entrance fee of $0, you can trek across seashores and mountain summits, photograph crystalline glaciers, visit a living laboratory, or check out a living biosphere reserve. urbanglimpses, Getty Images
 Arizona: If you like a little history with your free tourism, visit Mission San Xavier del Bac, an authentic church completed in 1797. The Tucson landmark is still religiously active in 2017, but architecture-wise you’ll feel like you’ve stepped into the 1800s. You can spend a little souvenir money in the museum or stroll along with a free docent tour every weekday and Saturday morning. Mariusz S. Jurgielewicz, Shutterstock.com
 Arkansas: The Crystal Bridges Museum of Art in Bentonville, Ark., is permanently free and includes works from the colonial era to the present, featuring paintings by Norman Rockwell and Andy Warhol. Not to be outdone, the Moshe Safdie-designed building stunningly blends modern architecture with the beauty of the natural world that surrounds it. Marc F. Henning, Crystal Bridges Museum of Art
 California: If you want to get your Tinseltown fix without indulging in the typical Hollywood Walk of Fame or the Chinese Theater tours, pay your respects to departed legends like Jayne Mansfield, Rudolph Valentino, Cecil B. DeMille, Johnny Ramone and hundreds of others among the immaculate landscaping at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery. Cemetery access is free, but Cinespia tickets for outdoor movie nights at the cemetery cost around $12 to $16. LagunaticPhoto, Shutterstock.com
 Colorado: The U.S. Mint in Denver makes money, but it doesn’t cost money to visit. At one of Colorado’s oldest institutions — founded in 1862 — free tours cover the history of coin craftsmanship and show you and your family the modern minting process firsthand. U.S. Mint Denver
 Connecticut: In terms of free activities in America, none smells better than the Elizabeth Park Rose Gardens. The first municipal rose garden in the U.S. is still going strong, boasting 15,000 rose bushes and 800 varieties of old and new roses. Walk under the garden’s distinctive flower arches to check out peaceful ponds and greenhouses while you’re there. Jon Bilous, Shutterstock.com
 Delaware: When you’re making a family itinerary of free fun activities, remember this: Kids love zoos. Children under three get to meet animals for free at the Brandywine Zoo, which makes it pretty popular with parents, too. Brandywine is home to a dozen acres’ worth of llamas, pandas, otters, owls, geckos and more. Brandywine Zoo
 Florida: The National Park Service is the ultimate purveyor of free tourist attractions that enable you to get some fresh air and exercise. Down in Big Cypress National Preserve, 729,000 acres of rich marine glades host a massive variety of plant communities, campsites and creatures, including the rare Florida panther. FrankMirbach, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Georgia: Sometimes the best tourist attractions are those that enrich the mind and spirit. Get inspired at the Martin Luther King Jr. Historic Site as you tour the Atlanta home where Martin Luther King Jr. was born, then continue walking in his footsteps as you explore some of his favorite places and hear an authentic Dr. King speech at the church where he preached. Nagel Photography, Shutterstock.com
 Hawaii: Of course Hawaii’s premier, cost-free outdoor attraction is a beach. Located just outside the charming village of Haleiwa Town, Sunset Beach — an ideal spot to surf, swim, or fish — has clear, blue water and clean sands that look like they’ve been pulled straight from a postcard. Hawaii Magazine named Sunset Beach one of the best Hawaiian places to watch the sunset — and clearly, it's one of the best deals on the island. zhuzhu, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 Idaho: Boise’s Greenbelt is a 25-mile stretch of parks with a scenic corridor that runs across plentiful greenery and waterways. It’s also a wildlife habitat and alternative transportation route — you can bike the beautiful 10-mile trail or engage the kids’ brains with a historical scavenger hunt. CSNafzger, Shutterstock.com
 Illinois: Statue Stories Chicago is an app that puts a new spin on the traditional museum or walking tour. Through August 2018, you can install the free app on your phone that brings 30 of Chicago’s most iconic statues — from Abe Lincoln to the bronze lion at the entrance of the Chicago Art Institute — to life via intriguing, humorous and dramatic narration. Johnny Knight, Johnny Knight
 Indiana: You can’t get more American than baseball, and you won’t find better games than those played by the Deep River Grinders vintage baseball team in Lake County. From May through October, this nonprofit group dedicated to preserving, promoting and perpetuating the game of baseball puts on free sports shows that authentically adhere to the 37 original rules of 1858 ball. Lake County Parks
 Iowa: The Pappajohn Sculpture Park combines creative culture with exercise, opening up 4.4 acres of green grass for visitors to explore 28 stunning modern sculptures. Photography and picnicking are encouraged, so use all that money you’re saving on admission to pack a nice basket lunch. Nagel Photography, Shutterstock.com
 Kansas: Enrich your road trip by taking in one of the 12 identical Madonna of the Trail statues that span across Route 66 from Ohio to New Mexico. Built by the National Society of Daughters of the American Revolution in the 1920s, the attraction celebrates the strength of pioneering women of America. Jimmy Emerson DVM, Flickr.com
 Kentucky: The words “free” and “bourbon” don’t often go together, but the Bluegrass State is happy to oblige. Start your journey by requesting a free Kentucky Bourbon Trail Passport online from the Kentucky Distillers’ Association and you’re off to the races. Although most distilleries along the trail do charge a nominal admission fee for tours, all of them offer free sample tastings. thomas carr, Shutterstock.com
 Louisiana: The Bayou Rum Distillery has a lot of history. The facility distills rum in traditional copper pots using unrefined Louisiana cane sugar and molasses, and you can see it all happen every Tuesday through Saturday free of charge. Bonus: You’ll get free samples of silver and spiced rum. Picasa, Bayou Rum
 Maine: Free skiing isn’t easy to come by, but if you’ve got the gear, the Fort Kent Outdoor Center has the goods. This 19.5-mile, groomed, snow trail network whisks you through beginner and advanced loops among striking conifers and majestic views. Some of the loops, like the Can-Am, are even lit for night skiing. Fort Kent Outdoor Center
 Maryland: Equal parts creepy, educational and free, the Edgar Alan Poe Collection at the Enoch Pratt Free Library is basically the posthumous home of America’s darkest literary giant. Here, you can browse everything from letters and clippings written in Poe’s own hand to a lock of hair taken from his head the day after his death in 1849. Everything is spooky but the price. Eugene Kim, Flickr.com
 Massachusetts: America isn’t short on free museums, but there aren’t too many that float on the water. This one, however, does just that — Old Ironsides at the USS Constitution Museum houses a collection of arms from the 18th and 19th centuries, 200 years’ worth of artwork, tools of the trade and even the crew's personal possessions. The museum operates on the basis of suggested donations, which can be as small or as large as you'd like. Diego Grandi, Shutterstock.com
 Michigan: If you're interested in visiting odd attractions, it doesn’t get much quirkier than Marvin’s Marvelous Mechanical Museum in Farmington Hills. The whimsical destination is packed full of unusual games, mechanical oddities, animatronics, machines and collectibles — so many that it's impossible to see everything in one trip. Admission is free, and you can spend the day spending just quarters. Marvelous Mechanical Museum
 Minnesota: Forget Yelp reviews — the poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow immortalized Minnehaha Falls in his 1853 poem “Song of Hiawatha.” And although the attraction’s trademark, 53-foot falls are certainly poetry in motion, don’t forget to check out the off-leash dog park, gorgeous river trails and Grand Rounds National Scenic Byway, a 50-mile outdoor recreation loop in the Minneapolis area. Gordon Ball LRPS, Shutterstock.com
 Mississippi: What looks like a modest Tupelo home on the outside is actually packed with cultural history — it’s the birthplace of Elvis, and his dad built it. You can also see a memorial chapel, a statue of Elvis with his first guitar, a fountain, park, story wall, memorabilia collection and more. The address is pretty easy to remember — this all-American attraction is located at 306 Elvis Presley Drive. AMB-MD Photography, Shutterstock.com
 Missouri: A Midwestern town known for its spectacular live shows, the city of Branson spent $7.5 million on the Branson Landing Light Show, a dazzling water attraction. Luckily, you don’t have to pay a dime to check out this mind-blowing spectacle of 120-foot geysers, fire, light and synchronized music — it runs every day of the week and features a variety of themes for songs like “Kung Fu Fighting,” “Hoe Down” and “The Star-Spangled Banner.” Roberto Cerini
 Montana: Montana is famed for its natural beauty, and if you want to get a taste of it all encapsulated in one 40-acre walking trail, Drinking Horse is your best bet. The eight-loop trail spans from Bridger Creek to the summit of Drinking Horse Mountain, gradually reaching a 700-foot elevation as you traverse areas with willows, cottonwoods, wildflowers and evergreens. Admission is free, but the view is priceless. Keith Ewing, Flickr.com
 Nebraska: Mammals from the Miocene Epoch — actually, their five- to 23-million-year-old fossils — pepper the region in Agate Fossil Beds National Monument, earning it the title of “The Great Bonebed of Agate.” Two grassy hiking trails and an artist-in-residence exhibit are on offer here, but don’t leave without visiting the full 3-D reconstructions of those massive, ancient mammals at the visitor center’s diorama. Zack Frank, Shutterstock.com
 Nevada: Vegas might be where some people go to lose money, but not if you know where to find deals. Starting at 11 a.m. daily, the Carnival Midway at Circus Circus in Las Vegas showcases an amazing — and amazingly free — live performance that dazzles the eyes and imagination with trapeze artists, strongmen, jugglers, acrobats, cyclists and more. MGM Resorts International
 New Hampshire: Anheuser-Busch’s Merrimack Brewery sits in the serene New England countryside, but the real tourist attraction is the beer. See how beer is made by checking out Busch’s seven-step brewing process, then wrap up your free tour by meeting the Budweiser Clydesdales in person and enjoying a bit of complimentary beer. Ritu Manoj Jethani, Shutterstock.com
 New Jersey: Zoos are better when they have a heart of gold. The Marine Mammal Stranding Center has responded to nearly 5,000 rescue calls for dolphins, whales, seals and turtles that have washed ashore along the state's coastline. During a free tour of the facility’s creature-inhabited ICU, pool house and 1,000-gallon observation tank, you’ll become friends with MMSC’s rescued critters, too. Although donations aren’t required, you’ll probably want to give after one look into those seals’ eyes. Marine Mammal Stranding Center
 New Mexico: Between 400 and 700 years ago, Native Americans and Spanish settlers carved intricate symbols into the massive volcanic rocks in Albuquerque. Those carvings exist today, and the Petroglyph National Monument invites you to decipher them. Before you do, clear your head with a variety of walking trails at the base of Mesa Point. IrinaK, Shutterstock.com
 New York: New York City has no shortage of iconic tourist attractions, and the Staten Island Ferry is no exception. Every year, 22 million people take this five-mile, 25-minute boat ride. Some people ride just to commute to their Manhattan job and back, but others simply enjoy the sweeping view of New York Harbor, including beautiful sightings of the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island. Not only is the trip free, so is the onboard internet access. Drop of Light, Shutterstock.com
 North Carolina: Six themed collections at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte Botanical Gardens run the gamut of fantastic flora. At the Carnivorous Garden, misty tropical plants, orchids and Sarracenia hybrids enshroud full-size dinosaur fossils. The Susie Harwood Garden, in contrast, offers quaint wooden bridges, the meadow-esque Mellichamp Terrace and Asian-inspired landscaping. David Ellis, Flickr.com
 North Dakota: No free road trip across America is complete without honoring the country’s true roots. The Knife River Indian Villages National Historic Site offers the opportunity to learn about the lives of the Northern Plains Tribes, who hail from the Missouri River and its tributaries. When you visit, you’ll find a balance of nature and education, including archeological events for kids and the Robinson Collection of authentic Native American objects. Brain Kerns
 Ohio: Cincinnati Art Museum, Cincy’s premiere art museum, is just too good to miss. With more than 67,000 pieces of art in the permanent collection alone, you’ll have the once-in-a-lifetime chance to absorb works by Franz Kline, John Trumbull, Hiroshi Sugimoto and hundreds more. Children under five are always free, and so is everyone else on Saturdays and Thursdays from 5 p.m. to 8 p.m. Cincinnati Art Museum
 Oklahoma: More than 400 miles of the epic Route 66 shoot through Oklahoma, encompassing roadside diners, vintage neon signs, retro car shows and even the Oklahoma Route 66 Museum in Clinton. Nearly 50 attractions along the way vary in price from free to pretty affordable, but the classic ride itself doesn’t cost a thing except gas. Nick Fox, Shutterstock.com
 Oregon: Before hipsters and craft beer became the state's major trend, Oregon was defined by the natural majesty of huge trees and ocean mists. At Forest Park, which dubs itself “America’s premier urban forest,” you can get a 5,157-acre slice of that majesty, including 80 miles of soft-surface trails, mountain views and guided hikes, all within the city limits of Portland. Forest Park Conservancy
 Pennsylvania: Even in 2017, some of the most significant relics of American history are still free. At the Liberty Bell Center, located at the intersection of Philadelphia’s 6th and Market streets, you’ll get the world’s closest view of the Liberty Bell, complete with Independence Hall in the background. Before you observe the relic, check out a 10-minute presentation about the bell to get hyped on history. f11photo, Shutterstock.com
 Rhode Island: So kids can exercise while they learn, Providence Children’s Museum focuses on playful, interactive exhibits like the swirling Water Ways, an outdoor native plant garden, a maze-like climbing puzzle and the underground tunnels of Underland. Snag free tickets during promotions like MetLife Family Friday or get in free if you’re the family of an Electronic Benefits Transfer cardholder or active-duty military personnel. Providence Children’s Museum
 South Carolina: Sheldon Church Ruins might be quaint compared to more flashy tourist traps, but this Beaufort County attraction is unforgettable. Constructed in the mid-1700s, these haunting ruins were an attempt to mimic the style of a Greek temple — right in the mossy woods of South Carolina. Bring your camera as you explore the dilapidated portico columns and Palladian windows before studying the historical names written on Old Sheldon’s marble sarcophagi. Denton Rumsey, Shutterstock.com
 South Dakota: Mount Rushmore is one of the most quintessential tourist attractions in the country — and it’s free. You know that you’ll be seeing the huge, carved faces of past presidents Washington, Jefferson, Roosevelt and Lincoln, but throughout the year, activities ranging from Lakota dance celebrations to plays at the amphitheater are free, too. Admission, not parking, is free. Jeffery Alan Brown, Shutterstock.com
 Tennessee: The Tennessee State Museum’s array of permanent exhibits and traveling installations focuses squarely on frontier history, with hundreds of pieces exploring everything from the first Tennesseans to the Age of Jackson to the Antebellum era. Take in this slice of the South for free — admission includes access to the Military Museum branch — and you can pop on over to the State Capitol for a guided tour, too. Roman Korotkov, Shutterstock.com
 Texas: You might have heard the expression, "dance like no one’s watching," but if you’re at the oldest dance hall in Texas, you can very often dance like no one’s paying. At Gruene Hall in New Braunfels, Texas, weekend shows and drinks come at a cost, but weekday shows are free. So dance your heart out like it’s 1878, the year Gruene Hall was built. Gruene Hall
 Utah: Utah’s Olympic Winter Games hosting gig ended in 2002, but it left behind 400 acres of awesome free outdoor activities just outside of Salt Lake City. Day passes for some areas and activities range from about $12 to $75, but the Alf Engen Ski Museum, 2002 Winter Olympic Games Museum, Discovery Zone, hiking trails and Mountain Challenge are all free of charge. Matt Hage, Utah Olympic Park
 Vermont: The Museum of the Creative Process calls itself “a center of creative discovery, innovative research and intellectual retreat.” This haven for creatives not only houses artistic and scientific exhibits, it features an emotional education program based on 30 years of clinical research. Open your mind to sculpture, art and a deeper emotional understanding — all for free. Jim Gipe, Museum of the Creative Process
 Virginia: James and Sallie Dooley left 100 acres of gardens, mansions, goats and sea otters in the Maymont estate as a gift to all Virginians, and now that gift is yours, too. Admission to the grounds and gardens is free, and the wildlife exhibits and mansion tours operate on suggested donations. Felix Lipov, Shutterstock.com
 Washington: Seattle might be the home of grunge, but Kubota Garden is anything but grungy. Landscaped by Fujitaro Kubota, these 20 peaceful acres combine Northwest flora with traditional Japanese garden designs. Beautiful bridges and paths gently guide you through rock outcroppings, streams, ponds and waterfalls, where you can meditate on all the money you’re not spending. Jaime Pharr, Shutterstock.com
 West Virginia: Sure, you can purchase Blenko Glass Company’s gorgeously delicate, handcrafted creations online or at the brick-and-mortar store, but it might be the creation process that leaves the biggest impression. Established in 1893, Blenko still employs many traditional glass-making techniques you can see in action for free — glass-blowing demonstrations are the highlight — and you’ll see the whole process as you venture through a fully functioning, glass-making production facility. Megan Morris, Flickr.com
 Wisconsin: In Pleasant Prairie, Wis., free candy makes your trip even more pleasant. Every day, the Jelly Belly Visitor Center and the Jelly Belly Express Train Tour whisk visitors through a free, 25-minute ride that explores production process of treats like candy corn, gummies, and, of course, jelly beans. The tour includes free samples and — seriously — a chorus line of giant dancing jelly beans. Saving money is sweet, but jelly beans, especially dancing ones, are even sweeter. Kevin Poirier, Jelly Belly
 Wyoming: Think of Wyoming and you probably envision stunning, otherworldly rocks that are the color of a summer sunset. That’s what Castle Gardens is all about, with its hundreds of prehistoric carvings — petroglyphs dated between A.D. 1000 and A.D. 1250 — that grace the sides of massive sandstone spires. As you walk the free trail, maybe you’ll be the first to figure out exactly what the ancient Athapaskan Native Americans were trying to tell people through their art. Scott Burgan, Flickr.com
 Taj Campton Place San Francisco: San Francisco's historic Taj Campton Place hotel has fall room rates available from an average of $432 per night, which includes a daily breakfast credit. The hotel’s location right next to the vibrant Union Square makes it an especially good spot for those looking to shop, eat out and take in a show or two. And should you prefer to stick even closer to home, the hotel even has a renowned Michelin-starred restaurant. Taj Hotels
 The Belmond El Encanto Santa Barbara: One of the oldest hotels in California, the Belmond El Encanto in Santa Barbara is also one of the grandest. Its sprawling 7 acres are synonymous with West Coast chic. Although the hotel is only a few minutes from town, its perch atop a hill affords such stunning views of the Pacific Ocean and a sense of serenity that guests might never want to leave. Prices are usually commensurate with the impeccable level of service and attention to detail evident throughout the property. In a recent search, rates fell to roughly $417 for a deluxe bungalow king room. Adrian Houston, Belmond Management Limited
 Hotel Bel-Air, Los Angeles: Nestled in the hills of swank Bel-Air above Los Angeles, the Hotel Bel-Air is a romantic, historic, Spanish-revival hotel that attracts the rich and famous; stars from Grace Kelly to Elizabeth Taylor to Marilyn Monroe to Tom Cruise have stayed there. Wolfgang Puck also has a restaurant on site at the expensive hotel — and you might even spot celebrities here. If you’re up for exploring, consider ordering banana pancakes from the iconic Fountain Coffee Room at the hotel's sister location, The Beverly Hills Hotel. Then head downtown to check out The Broad, a museum of contemporary art, before returning to Bel-Air for a peaceful escape from the bustle of the city. Room rates for fall start at $565 per night. Dorchester Collection
 Amangani, Jackson Hole, Wyo.:Less than 5 miles from downtown Jackson Hole, Wyo., and perched in the foothills of the majestic Teton Mountains, is the Amangani Resort — a five-star ski lodge that's open all year. Every window in the hotel spans floor to ceiling, affording sweeping views of the mountains and the Snake River Valley. Rooms have fireplaces and deep soaking tubs, and the hotel also has a spa, a restaurant and even a cozy library. A recent search saw fall prices starting at $750 per night. Amangani
 The Peninsula Chicago: In a city full of excellent hotels, The Peninsula Chicago stands out for its incredible décor and its unbeatable location on Magnificent Mile in the high-rise Water Tower Park. The lobby has a beautiful stained-glass art installation, 20-foot windows and even a chocolate bar on weekends. Use the hotel as your home base to explore the world famous Art Institute of Chicago, and then treat yourself to a burger and fries at Ralph Lauren’s RL Restaurant around the corner. Rooms are available at $408 per night. The Peninsula Hotels
 Topping Rose House, Bridgehampton, N.Y.: When the hordes of summer tourists in the Hamptons go home, hotel prices in the area plummet. One of the best hotels on the posh stretch of Long Island is Topping Rose House in Bridgehampton, N.Y. Situated in a historic white clapboard house with a contemporary adjacent house, 22 guest rooms and suites are decked out in Frette linens, with a heated outdoor pool and the Jean-Georges at Topping Rose House restaurant, which features produce from the property’s farm. Rooms start at $495 a night. Michael Weber, The Topping Rose House
 White Elephant, Nantucket, Mass.: Further north, on the island of Nantucket, the White Elephant offers a luxurious experience. The impeccable property on Nantucket Harbor is done up in true island style, with gray shingles and white trim. Walk to town in about 10 minutes along the cobblestone streets for lunch at Black-Eyed Susan’s, and then venture to Great Point for a harbor cruise, whale watching, a seal cruise or clamming. Rooms start at $225 per night. The White Elephant
 Fairmont Orchid, Kohala Coast, Hawaii: Are you planning a luxurious Hawaiian vacation? Consider staying at this hotel. Located on the Big Island of Hawaii, the Fairmont Orchid is a serene paradise perched on a white sand beach on the Kohala Coast. The 540 rooms have their own balconies, and there are ample opportunities to get active with the hotel’s fitness center, as well as its golf, tennis and waterfront pool amenities. Norio’s Japanese Steakhouse & Sushi Bar, in the hotel, gets top marks for its incredibly fresh fish. A garden room is available for $319. Fairmont Hotel and Resorts
 The Hay-Adams, Washington, D.C.: Book a stay at The Hay-Adams this fall — one of the most luxurious hotels in the U.S. It has hosted everyone from Amelia Earhart to Ethel Barrymore. After a long day of sightseeing at the Newseum and the latest Smithsonian Institution museum, the National Museum of African American History & Culture, dine at chef José Andrés’ buzzy Oyamel. Then, head to the hotel rooftop for a nightcap with a view of the nearby White House. Some rooms cost an average of $399 per night this fall. Kip Dawkins, The Hay-Adams
 Four Seasons Resort Rancho Encantado, Santa Fe, N.M.: Fall is the best time to visit Santa Fe when the temperatures are still warm enough to enjoy all the hiking, biking and nature the Southwest has to offer. Stay at the gorgeous Four Seasons Resort Rancho Encantado, which is 10 minutes from the city’s vibrant downtown, tucked into rolling hills under the high desert skies. The rooms have wood-burning fireplaces and terraces with incredible views, and the hotel organizes expeditions to everywhere from nearby hiking trails to the Ghost Ranch made famous by artist Georgia O’Keeffe. Rates start at $473 per night. Erhard Pfeiffer, Four Seasons Hotels and Resorts
 Keswick Hall and Golf Club, Keswick, Va.: In the scenic Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia, Keswick Hall and Golf Club is a beautiful hotel with Italianate-style architecture and an excellent golf course. If you don’t mind slightly cooler temperatures while playing golf or exploring the grounds of nearby Monticello — Thomas Jefferson’s estate — fall is an ideal time to visit. A recent search for rooms in October saw prices at $499 per night. However, rates start at $189 per night, based on availability, according to a representative for the property. Rolling Greens Photo, Ken E. May, Keswick Hall Resort
 Wentworth Mansion, Charleston, S.C.: The Magnolia trees in bloom offer a good reason to visit Charleston in the spring. But there are plenty of good reasons to visit in the fall. The stifling heat and humidity of summer will have faded away, but the weather will still be temperate. Stay at the luxurious Wentworth Mansion, which dates back to 1886 and was built as a house for a wealthy cotton merchant. It even has Tiffany glass above most of its doorways. Fall rates start at $430. Go on one of the annual fall tours put on by the Preservation Society of Charleston to get a sense of the city’s rich history, then enjoy a meal at James Beard Award-winning chef Sean Brock’s Husk Restaurant. Wentworth Mansion
 The Saint Paul Hotel, Saint Paul, Minn.: By September, the summer tourist crowds have left the Minneapolis-Saint Paul area, but frigid winter temperatures have yet to set in, making it the ideal time to visit the bustling Midwestern city. The Saint Paul Hotel is the city’s ritziest and most historic. It was designed by Reed and Stem, the architects who created New York City’s Grand Central Station. Go to the famous Walker Art Center in Minneapolis for a contemporary art fix, then have dinner at the area’s noted Spoon and Stable restaurant. Fall rates start at $232.33 per night. The Saint Paul Hotel
 The Ritz-Carlton, New Orleans: Before Mardi Gras and Jazz Fest tourists gum up the streets of New Orleans in the winter and spring, visit this iconic city in the fall. The Ritz-Carlton is the perfect place to stay. Located on the edge of the French Quarter, the hotel features all of the neighborhood’s architectural charm but is far enough away from the noise of the Quarter’s rowdier center. Have a mint julep in the hotel’s courtyard before heading to Café Du Monde for beignets. Rates are as low as $258 for a deluxe king room. The Ritz-Carlton
 Rosewood Mansion on Turtle Creek, Dallas: Despite sweltering temperatures, summer is peak season in Dallas, so wait until fall to book a stay in this exciting city. Stay at the Rosewood Mansion on Turtle Creek, which originally was a private residence of a cotton mogul. His family traveled throughout Europe, collecting antiques to enhance the residence. Fall room rates start at $371 per night. Rosewood Mansion on Turtle Creek
 Fairmont Olympic Hotel, Seattle: With the leaves changing in the dense woodlands around Seattle and the beautiful Puget Sound area, fall is an excellent time to visit the Emerald City. The Fairmont Olympic is one of Seattle’s oldest hotels. Built in 1924, it features crystal chandeliers hanging from high ceilings and an afternoon tea. Rooms are available from $299 per night. Fairmont Hotel and Resorts
 The US Grant, San Diego: Want to visit one of the most historic sites in America? The US Grant in San Diego is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. It was built in 1910 by the son of President Ulysses S. Grant, for whom the hotel is named. Live like a president by taking advantage of the off-peak travel season in San Diego in the fall. Rooms at the US Grant can be had for as low as $332 per night. While in San Diego, visit the famous Birch Aquarium, and eat at the acclaimed Sushi Ota. Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldw
 Taj Boston: Fall is an excellent time to visit Boston, as summer crowds have left but temperatures are still moderate before the winter cold sets in. The majestic Taj Boston in Back Bay looks over the beautiful Boston Common, where wooden swan boats will still be operating in the fall before being retired for the winter. Walk the Freedom Trail before having dinner at local favorite Yvonne’s, a cozy supper club where it might be crisp enough for the fire to be lit at night. Fall rates are available from an average of $491.10 per night. Taj Hotels
