Stunning vineyards in Argentina and Chile
Two hours south of Santiago, the Colchagua Valley is Chile’s premier wine-growing region and home to the sprawling, hillside estate of Montes. Brad Japhe, for USA TODAY
 Francis Mallmann is quite possibly South America’s most prominent culinary export. Although the celebrity chef hails from Argentina, he partners with Viña Montes for Fuegos de Apalta restaurant, marking his first foray into Chile, onsite at the winery. Brad Japhe, for USA TODAY
 Before descending into a high-alpine desert strewn in hues of auburn, terra-cotta and rusted metal, you’ll have to pass through customs. The crossing can take upwards of an hour, and is far and away the only unnerving aspect of this awe-inspiring section of skyway. Brad Japhe, for USA TODAY
 The luxuriously appointed tasting room and restaurant sits on 175 acres of vines, planted at an elevation of 4,300 feet. The unique location inspired the brand’s Altitud series, featuring a high concentration of black fruit and pepper spice in several grape varieties ranging from Merlot to Malbec. Brad Japhe, for USA TODAY
 Just south of Tupungato lies the heart of the Uco Valley. With more than 250 sunny days a year, access to ample irrigation and a significant diurnal swing (temperature change between day and night), this section of the Mendoza region is densely thicketed with vines and vintners. Brad Japhe, for USA TODAY
 Open daily, ‘Killka’ focuses on the works of modern artists from Argentina and Holland — the winery founders’ native home. After making your way through the collection, a five-minute outdoor walk through the vines leads visitors to a massive underground bodega and tasting cellar. Brad Japhe, for USA TODAY
 Though Lagarde makes a fair amount of girthy, grittier reds worth sampling, the Semillon is a midday must -- bright, vivacious and full of summer-scented overtures. Torrontes is another style of white more commonly associated with wines of Argentina -- have it here for a sense of what makes it so special. Brad Japhe, for USA TODAY
Last SlideNext Slide

Visiting the great winemaking regions of the world involves so much more than just tasting the goods. Indeed, if it were only about the juice, you could make your way to a local merchant and save yourself a fortune in airfare. But you’d be robbing yourself of a priceless experience along the way. That’s because the elegance of any wine reflects the beauty of the land that birth it. Nowhere on earth displays this connection quite as convincingly as the wines of the Andes. Rows of meticulously manicured vines, backdropped by 20,000-foot peaks — kissing the sky in caps of snow — make a sight you will not soon forget. And it’s worth traveling a great distance to behold.
Although far from the States (flight time between New York City and Santiago, Chile, clocks in at around 11 hours), the high-elevation vineyards of Chile and Argentina are surprisingly accessible once you get off the plane. A viticultural adventure spanning the countries, traversing the highest mountain range outside the Himalayas, can be achieved with minimal planning and modest expenditures. It’s also the ideal winter getaway, since the Southern Hemisphere experiences summer (and the subsequent grape harvest) during the first few months of the calendar year.
No matter the climate, a journey here always reveals a warm, welcoming culture, with a big appetite for joy — and grilled meats. You can taste it in the wines, from the fruit-forward Cabs and Bordeaux blends of eastern Chile, to the soft, floral Malbecs of Mendoza. A spate of sleek, modern tasting rooms line the route, stating the case for South American supremacy in 21st-century winemaking. Whether or not you choose to buy what they’re selling, stop at these places during your drive and you’ll come home with something bigger than any number of bottles can hold. 
Browse the photos above for the ultimate wine adventure around the Andes, and see more scenic wine travel below.

 Showstopping scenery abounds throughout Germany’s wine regions. Minimal development keeps the countryside bucolic; combined with the classic architecture and fachwerk homes (timber-framed), the effect transports visitors to another century. Lauren Mowery
