U. of Maryland police admit they could have avoided using pepper spray on partygoers
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 
A video depicting University of Maryland police officers using pepper spray at an on-campus party is causing some students to ask if there is racial bias in the department.
The incident occurred in May. The University of Maryland Police Department completed their investigation on July 14 and released video footage of the incident captured by a body camera.
This is the video (warning: there is strong language, and you may find it upsetting):
In the investigation report’s conclusion, Chief of Police David B. Mitchell revealed that the pepper spray had been used unnecessarily.
“As it is the responsibility of all UMPD police officers to protect and serve our community, we must exhibit exemplary judgement to deescalate difficult situations,” he wrote. “Throughout the May 21 incident, we should have handled the situation with more diplomacy. It is my opinion that the subsequent deployment of pepper spray could have been avoided.”
He added,
“This did not have to happen.”
Due to the improper deployment of the pepper spray, the officer was ordered to a two-week suspension without pay.
This is not the first time pepper spray has been used on university students.
In 2001, for example, a pepper spray incident occurred at University of California Davis during an Occupy protest, which later became a viral meme.
According to a USA TODAY College article, “About 92% of public campuses used sworn police officers, those with full arrest powers, and most sworn officers were authorized to carry guns, pepper spray and batons and to patrol beyond campus boundaries.”
But if this did not have to happen on UMD’s campus, why did it?
Because the party was attended predominately by black students, some are questioning whether race played a factor in how the situation was handled.
In an article for UMD’s student newspaper, the Diamondback, Kumea Shorter-Gooden, the university’s chief diversity officer, expressed concerns.
“This incident has been very disturbing for our campus community, particularly our Black and African American community,” she said in the article.
Katherine Swanson, UMD’s student body president, told USA TODAY College that her initial reaction, after wanting to reach out to check in with her peers, was shock.
“Just watching the video was really shocking. I was really shocked by the aggressive tone and attitude of the officers at the door of the party,” she said. “I had read the report of the investigation and had been upset by it, but watching the video was completely different. Being able to see what had happened for myself. … It really shocked me and upset me, and my colleagues in student government felt the same way.”
She said that, as a white student, she could not speak personally to the relationship between black students and the UMPD, and added that her black colleagues, fellow students and friends were “not pleased and are especially not pleased now.”
Twitter user @_zensei expressed frustration in a video the night of the incident.
 This is how @UMPD handles situations: Breaking and entering.
Pepper spray.
Assault.
Malicious threats. pic.twitter.com/Ug43VyaWhO
 — Theós (@_zensei) May 21, 2016
Some believe the suspension for the officer in question helps rectify the situation.
Oscar Barbarin, a professor and African-American studies department chair at UMD, told the Diamondback that the actions Mitchell took in suspending the officer show a step in the right direction.
“I have a lot of respect for [Mitchell],” Barbarin said in the article. “He has been very forward-thinking and very responsive. … The response of suspending the person [an officer involved] for poor judgment sends a very strong message that things that police might have ordinarily gotten away with in the past are not going to be tolerated under his administration.”
Swanson does agree that the incident came as a surprise due to the UMPD’s seemingly positive reputation with students.
“I do think that this whole thing came as a shock to the entire student body just because UMPD is notorious for being good with students. I don’t know of anything like this that has happened in the past,” she said. “I wouldn’t say that UMD has a reputation for having a bad relationship with students, … [but] I worry this has been a problem in the past and just no one has noticed.”
As far a racial bias being a factor in this incident, Swanson expressed strong feelings.
“I’ve been to my fair share of frat parties on this campus where the majority of the students have been white, and I’ve never seen something happen like this, and the parties have been much wilder than the one I saw in the video,” she said. “And that’s, to me, very telling.”
Wallace Loh, the university’s president, reacted to the incident in a letter that applauded Mitchell for his transparency and accountability, but also described the pepper spray as something that “could have been avoided.”
“This is a charged time in our nation,” he wrote in the letter. “As a society, we must find a path forward to come together. I deeply regret the incident at The Courtyards, but I believe that the actions by Chief Mitchell and UMPD are important steps on our campus to bridge chasms, salve anguish and anger, and promote justice.”
Swanson added that UMD’s student government association are taking steps to help move forward from this incident and improve the student-police relationship.
The UMPD denied multiple requests for comment.
Sara Moniuszko is a student at George Mason University and a USA TODAY College correspondent.
