Bomb threats again rattle Jewish centers
CONNECTTWEET 2 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Another wave of bomb threats swept through Jewish community centers across the nation Tuesday.
Centers from Albany, N.Y., to Boulder, Colo., to White Fish Bay, Wis., to La Jolla, Calif., were among those evacuated. Fourteen centers in 10 states plus a Canadian province received threats, according to the JCC Association of North America.
"While the situation is developing, most have already received the all-clear from local law enforcement and resumed regular operations, with a heightened level of security," David Posner, director of strategic performance at the New York-based organization, said in a statement.
Posner pointed out that Tuesday marked the third time in January that Jewish community centers have been targeted by bomb threats. On Jan. 18, 27 centers in 17 states received threats, he said. On Jan. 9, 16 centers in nine states were targeted, he added.
"We are concerned about the anti-semitism behind these threats," Posner said.
The Jewish Journal obtained audio of one of the Jan. 18th calls. The news organization does not specify which center received the call. The recording appeared to be made with voice-disguising technology, the Journal reported:
"It's a C-4 bomb with a lot of shrapnel, surrounded by a bag (inaudible)," the Journal's transcript reads. "In a short time, a large number of Jews are going to be slaughtered. Their heads are going to [sic] blown off from the shrapnel. There’s a lot of shrapnel. There’s going to be a bloodbath that’s going to take place in a short time. I think I told you enough. I must go."
Such scares are not rare, the Anti-Defamation League acknowledged. In the other January cases, officials allowed staff and children to return to the centers within a few hours.
"This unfortunately looks like the latest round," Elise Jarvis, associate director for law enforcement outreach at the ADL, told USA TODAY. "So far the ones that were investigated were found not to be credible threats. But at the same time we need to take every one extremely seriously."
In Boulder, Colo., a bomb threat led to the evacuation of the Boulder Jewish Community Center on Tuesday morning. Boulder Police first tweeted about the evacuation at around 9:50 a.m. MT. "Police are investigating a bomb threat @ Boulder Jewish Community Center. All occupants in and around the bldg have been safely evacuated," the department tweeted.

In La Jolla, Calif., the Lawrence Family Jewish Community Center was evacuated Tuesday morning after receiving a bomb threat. The center's phone message said a thorough search was being conducted and everyone had been evacuated to a nearby facility.
In White Fish Bay, Wis., Harry & Rose Samson Family Jewish Community Center President Mark Shapiro said there was a "safe and calm, full evacuation of our facilities" and the building was closed. A robo-call to parents with children enrolled in programs at the facility said the closure followed a threat, the specifics of which weren't detailed.
Police in Albany, N.Y., tweeted that "Officers are on the scene of bomb threat at #Albany JCC. Staff notified police after receiving phone call. More information to follow." Later an all-clear was issued.
Thank you @TroyNYPolice, @ACSOTWEET, and @nyspolice for your assistance this morning during bomb threat in #Albany. pic.twitter.com/1pYIrYPeQp
— Steve Smith (@APDSmith) January 31, 2017
Salt Lake City police Det. Greg Wilking said the I.J. & Jeanne Wagner Jewish Community Center reported a telephoned threat at 9:24 a.m. About 300 people were evacuated, and a bomb-sniffing dog was seen entering the building, The Salt Lake Tribune reported. "We don't believe it's a credible threat at this time," Wilking told The Tribune.
In Lake County, Ill., the sheriff's office received a 911 call Tuesday morning regarding a bomb threat received at the JCC Apache Day Camp, which also houses a day care center. Sheriff's deputies searched the building and property and found nothing amiss, according to the sheriff's office. Students were taken to another location, according to the sheriff's office.
Jarvis would not theorize on the motive for the calls.
"It's extremely disruptive; it can cause fear and panic,"she said. "It's hard to know what motivates all this without knowing who did it."
Contributing: Melanie Eversley, USA TODAY New York bureau; Allison Sylte, KUSA-TV Denver; Natalie Neysa Alund, The (Nashville) Tennessean;Jacob Carpenter, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
CONNECTTWEET 2 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2jRzOsp
