Trump: Primary rules 'stacked against me'
1 Shares 



CLOSE

 Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump called the Republican primary elections a 'dirty trick' in at a rally in New York Tuesday, referring to the weight placed on delegates. (April 12) AP
Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this post contained an incorrect date for the New York primary.
Donald Trump is angry. Indignant, even.
At least when it comes to states where Ted Cruz is pulling ahead, especially Colorado.
Anderson Cooper pressed Trump at the CNN town hall Tuesday about his ground game (or lack thereof) in the Centennial State, where Cruz won 34 of the state's Republican delegates. But Trump insisted it wasn't his fault and called the Texas senator's win the latest in a series of political "shenanigans."
"Didn't you just get outplayed on the ground?" Cooper asked.
"No, I don't think so," Trump said." He added: "We're really way up in votes, in terms of the voters ... but the Colorado thing was very unfair."

Colorado's GOP leaders canceled the state party's straw poll for March 1 for a convention where the delegates were free to pledge for any candidate on the ballot, rather than being bound by the poll results. It was a controversial decision that experts said would likely deter candidates from campaigning ardently in the state, The Denver Post reported.
In the days following the Colorado convention, the Republican front-runner accused the GOP leadership of conspiring to stop him from winning the nomination. Trump called the GOP primary elections a "dirty trick" at a rally Tuesday in New York, referring to the weight placed on delegates.
At the town hall, Trump went on to say the same about the Republican contest in Louisiana, where he won the popular vote with 41.4% over Cruz's 37.8%. Both candidates received 18 delegates.

But Cooper pressed Trump on the issue, pointing to his disorganized efforts in Colorado. Trump hired his first paid staffer in the state the week before the results. Cruz, who had staffers courting delegates as early as Super Tuesday, had already secured delegates in some congressional districts.
Trump supporters passed out fliers at the convention site Saturday with the official campaign slate of 13 delegates and their alternates, only to discover later that the slate had multiple errors, CNN reported. The other candidates managed to keep their slates error-free.

Meanwhile, Trump spent the weekend in New York, which holds its primary April 19. New York has 95 delegates up for grabs versus Colorado's 34. It's still more than the 42 at stake in Wisconsin, where Cruz won 36 of the delegates to Trump's six.
But, despite Trump's complaints, his strategy on the ground matters. Nate Silver's assessment is that while Trump's strategy to prioritize New York makes sense, he failed to focus enough on states with fewer delegates and compromised his steady lead. And he based part of his evaluation on a panel of delegate "experts" who predicted Trump wouldn't exceed the 1,237 delegates needed, even with better outcomes in Wisconsin and Colorado.
There will be opportunities down the line in states like California for him to earn more delegates than our panel projected. But the math is close enough that disregarding Colorado was probably a big mistake. Trump and those watching this delegate fight shouldn’t kid themselves: Every delegate matters.

x
Embed
x
CLOSE

DONALD TRUMP ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL Trump said Obama controls The Fed. here's how it really works | 1:38
Donald Trump claimed Obama is manipulating the Federal Reserve for political reasons, but experts were quick to correct him. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
1 of 56

 Trump said Obama controls The Fed. here's how it really works 

 Trump: Poor Immigrant Screening Caused Attacks 

 Trump hits back at Clinton's Islamic State claim 

 Trump appears to pre-empt NYC cops on blast 

 Trump says Clinton put entire country in danger 

 Trump wins Indiana, dimming hopes of contested convention 

 Donald Trump: 'Cruz one tough competitor' 

 Should Trump worry about Cruz and Kasich working together? 

 Trump calls Cruz-Kasich deal 'pathetic' 

 Trump: Clinton Is 'As Crooked as They Come" 

 Trump: Final Push Ahead of Tuesday's 5 Contests 

 Trump Camp: Candidate Will Be Seen Differently 

 Trump: Not Ready to Act Presidential 'Quite Yet' 

 Trump Rails Against Clinton Following NY Primary 

 Trump Says Not Surprised By 'Incredible' NY Win 

 Cruz brushes off Trump's win in New York 

 Front-runners score big wins in New York primary 

 Trump: 'We don't have much of a race anymore' 

 Donald Trump basks in New York primary victory 

 Trump wins NY, causing issues for #NeverTrump movement 

 Donald Trump casts vote in New York 

 Trump accidentally refers to '7/11' terror attack 

 Delegates up for grabs on Primary Day in New York 

 Trump Meets With Minority, Women Backers in NYC 

 Trump: Delegate system is '100% crooked' 

 Trump: My rallies among 'safest places' on earth 

 Trump supporters rally against Colorado GOP 

 Trump blasts Cruz, Kasich, and Republican Party 

 Trump: I'd get electric chair for f-bomb 

 Trump in Pittsburgh: 'How's Joe Paterno?' 

 Trump campaign manager incident with reporter 

 Trump: I'm Running for President to 'Give Back' 

 Trump Losing Ground to Cruz in Delegate Chase 

 Trump: Election System 'A Dirty Trick' 

 Fight breaks out at Albany, N.Y. Trump rally 

 Trump: Cruz 'does not like' New Yorkers 

 Watch Donald Trump Slam the Delegate System 

 Trump: We have the safest rallies anywhere 

 Raw: Trump Visits 9/11 Memorial and Museum 

 Kirstie Alley endorses Donald Trump, ticks off Twitter 

 Trump attacks Cruz, delighting home crowd in new York 

 5 things to know about Melania Trump 

 Trump and Cruz claim Kasich's just a spoiler 

 Melania Trump Makes Rare Appearance in Wis. 

 How Donald Trump's son-in-law is shaping his campaign 

 Trump: being presidential would be 'boring' 

 Trump Predicts 'Very Big Victory' in Wisconsin 

 Trump: Kasich Should Not Be Allowed to Run 

 In Wisc., Trump Tries to Regain Campaign Footing 

 Trump Criticizes Iran Deal; Calls Obama 'Baby' 

 Trump backs off of abortion 'punishment' comments 

 Trump, Cruz and Kasich take back vow to support Republican nominee 

 Trump Met With Protests in Janesville, Wisconsin 

 Police say teenager was groped and pepper-sprayed outside trump rally 

 Trump, Cruz And Kasich back away from their RNC loyalty pledges 

 Trump stands by campaign manager Lewandowski 



Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1N7UreE
