Reviewed.com announces its winners from annual CES
Reviewed.com, a part of USA TODAY that publishes content on award-winning products, announced its Editors’ Choice Award Winners from this year’s International CES yesterday.
As an official media partner of CES, Reviewed sifted through thousands of announcements and gadgets, highlighting the products that will matter to readers most in the coming year—a.k.a. the “products you’re actually going to buy.”
The 34 winners selected were products that excelled in innovation, core technology, design, and value. Each product was selected by a member of Reviewed’s onsite team of expert writers and editors after spending hands-on time with the product. The winning products in each category are as follows:
TV & Home Theater: Samsung's "The Wall" MicroLED TV, Sony A8F TV, TCL 6 Series TV, Panasonic FZ950 TV, LG C8 TV
Smart Home: Kohler Konnect Smart Kitchen and Bathroom Fixtures, iDevices Instinct Smart Switch with Alexa, D-Link LTE Full HD Indoor/Outdoor Camera
Laptops & Mobile: New Dell XPS 13 (2018), Lenovo ThinkPad X1 Carbon (2018), Belkin Boost Up Bold, Samsung Notebook 9 Pen, Dell XPS 15 2-in-1
Headphones: Sony WF-SP700N True Wireless Earbuds, Audio-Technica QuietPoint ANC700BT, JLab Epic Sport Wireless
Photo & Video: DJI Osmo 2 Mobile, Panasonic DMC-GH5S
Kitchen & Appliances: LG Refrigerator with InstaView ThinQ, Whirlpool Range with Yummly, Samsung QuickDrive, Tetra Countertop Dishwasher, Ecovacs Deebot Ozmo 930
Gaming: Nvidia Big Format Gaming Display, HyperX Cloud Flight
Parenting & Kids’ Tech: Magik AR-enabled toothbrush for kids, Freemie Independence Breast Pump, Cocoon Cam Clarity
Health, Beauty & Fitness: Schwarzkopf Professional SalonLab, Neutrogena Skin360, Foreo UFO Smart Mask, Electron Wheel (Gen 2) Electric Bicycle Wheel with Google Assistant
Automotive: Hyundai Nexo, Kia Niro Electric
David Kender, Editor in Chief of Reviewed, notes that “[t]here’s a lot of cool looking stuff [at CES] that will fizzle out as vaporware. You have to poke around and ask hard questions to find out what’s real.”
This year’s CES was held at the Las Vegas Convention and World Trade Center and multiple venues across the city from January 9-12. The large scale event is one of the most important platforms to launch new tech products each year. For more information on this year’s CES, click here.
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2ExbWlA
