How to manage your finances as an on-demand worker
139 Shares 



As companies like Uber, Airbnb, and GrubHub shape the economy with their on-demand models, the work world continues to evolve. The rapid expansion of this on-demand sphere pushes more and more people to join in the pursuit of setting their own schedule, working a variety of jobs at the same time, or honing their skill in a specific niche.

According to an Intuit study, 63% of these on-demand workers take these gigs to supplement their income with side hustles. 46% of on-demand workers say that on-demand jobs allow them to control their schedules. On-demand work is well within reach thanks to popular services like Uber and hiring networks like Moonlighting.
While on-demand work provides flexibility and freedom that a traditional nine-to-five job cannot always provide, on-demand workers are self-employed in the eyes of the IRS. This means that these workers must track their business (gigs and freelancing work) finances separate from their personal finances and submit quarterly estimated tax payments to the IRS.
With some planning and financial know-how, you can learn how to manage and your finances and taxes as an on-demand worker. Here’s how to get started. And find more tips and tricks laid out for you at Lightpost, USA TODAY's comprehensive, expert-sourced checklists for freelancers.
Tracking Expenses
On-demand workers must remember to track all expenses related to their on-demand work to comply with tax rules. Expenses for on-demand work could include:
• Utilities, internet and cable
 • Car or transportation costs
 • Supplies related to your gigs (tools, fuel, insurance)
 • Additional homeowner’s insurance (if you run your gig out of your home)
 QuickBooks Self-Employed can help you keep track of expenses so that you’re ready at tax time. You can enter your expenses manually or take a photo of your receipts and QuickBooks Self-Employed will enter and categorize them for you. If your on-demand work involves driving, you can also use the built-in mileage tracker to keep track of your tax-deductible mileage.
 Remember, it’s important to keep your business (on-demand work) expenses separate from your personal expenses for Uncle Sam.
Managing Cash Flow
Some types of on-demand work require that you submit invoices weekly or monthly to get paid. You will need to create, submit, and track your invoices so that you know how much money is coming into your account and whether you have enough money to cover your expenses. This is called cash flow management. Maintaining a positive cash flow means that you have enough money to cover your expenses and any purchases you may need to make. QuickBooks Self-Employed keeps all your finances in order so you know exactly where you stand, and you can see how much money is coming into and going out of your account each month.
Paying Estimated Taxes
Everyone must report their income to the IRS each year, whether they are a full-time employee working in a company or an on-demand worker. Full-time nine-to-fivers typically receive a W-2 from their employers and use it to report their income when they file taxes. Alternatively, on-demand workers usually receive a 1099 from each client or service provider (i.e. Uber) they worked for that calendar year. The 1099 form reports the total amount paid to the on-demand worker that year.
When you work for a company full-time, the company is responsible for withholding taxes from your paycheck and delivering those tax payments to the IRS. Full-time employees don’t need to worry about sending tax payments to Uncle Sam throughout the year because their employer does it on their behalf. However, when you are an on-demand worker, you are responsible to calculate and send the IRS your tax payments. The IRS requires on-demand workers to send estimated tax payments every quarter and then to file taxes by April 15.
One way to calculate your quarterly estimated tax payments is to use last year’s tax return information. If you expect to make roughly the same amount of money this year that you made last year, you could take last year’s total tax bill and divide it by four to get to a quarterly tax estimate. You could also use the IRS’s Form 1040-ES to help guide you. QuickBooks Self-Employed is another easy option. Because it tracks your expenses, income, and other finances for your on-demand work, it can calculate estimated tax payments for you.
Once you’ve calculated how much tax you owe each quarter, you can submit those estimated tax payments directly to the IRS via the EFTPS system. Remember to keep track of exactly how much money you’ve sent Uncle Sam throughout the year, as you will use this information when you file taxes.
With a bit of research and practice, you can learn how to manage your finances and taxes as an on-demand worker. For more information, check out the Complete Guide to Taxes for the Self-Employed. To take the dive into the on-demand economy and start taking control of your own schedule, join Moonlighting.
This article is part of Lightpost, USA TODAY's checklists to help you become the best freelancer you can be.



Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2oS3Ksj
