Tour Amsterdam's Foodhallen market
A national monument with distinctive industrial character, De Hallen is the only tram depot of its kind that is still preserved. It was built in phases between 1901 and 1928. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 When deciding which vendors would fill the stalls in De Foodhallen, the owners had a checklist. They wanted good food above all, a diverse collection of cuisines and stands operated by entrepreneurs already established in the Netherlands. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Bitterballen are deep-fried balls of meaty gravy that are often served as bar snacks. De BallenBar uses local ingredients from the Netherlands to create inventive versions of the classic like chef Peter Gast’s famous bouillabaisse bitterballen. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 For the ramens, Baowowow Yippie Yo Yippie Yay imports artisanal Hawaiian noodles from Sun Noodle and authentic compounds from Japan for the bouillons. While these ingredients come from afar, the vegetables are grown by local farmers. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 After success with the first round of vendors, the owners decided to invite new entrepreneurs to open stands in 2016. One such vendor is Dim Sumthing, a stall started by Dolek Ho, who spent the first two years at De Foodhallen behind the gin and tonic bar. That was until he realized the need for dim sum. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Growing up, Dolek Ho visited Hong Kong and often ate dim sum with his grandparents. Though this breakfast of dumplings and buns differed from the Netherlands’ bread and cheese, he eventually developed an appreciation for it and knew it belonged in De Foodhallen. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Fento’s constantly evolving, nutrition-first menu includes burritos, nachos and bowls made with clean ingredients like Dutch greens, free-range chicken and lacto-fermented pickles. Plus, they have an urban greenhouse in Amsterdam-Noord where they grow their own tomatoes and tomatillos. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Dominique M. Spijker decided to open Jabugo Bar Iberico in De Foodhallen after becoming familiar with Spanish delicacies during a visit to Mercado de San Miguel, the same covered market in Madrid, Spain that inspired the owners of De Foodhallen. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 According to Spijker, jamón ibérico made from pigs raised in Southern Spain has a strong flavor because the pigs eat hot, dry acorns, whereas jamón ibérico from pigs raised in Madrid is sweeter due to a diet of colder, wet acorns. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Píta is an organic döner kebab stand from Restaurant Breda and Guts & Glory chefs Freek van Noortwijk and Guillaume de Beer and their longtime friend Hidde Vloemans. Hidde is the big kebab fan in the bunch and he approached his talented chef friends with the idea, because he thought Amsterdam was seriously lacking quality Turkish kebab. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Meneer Temaki, De Foodhallen’s modern Japanese street food stand, started as a food truck feeding festival goers. Its temaki (sushi hand rolls) and yakitori (grilled, skewered chicken) were so popular that Meneer Temaki was asked to be in the first group of vendors to open in De Foodhallen. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 After mastering temaki and yakitori, Meneer Temaki added maki (cut sushi rolls) and poke bowls to its menu. It was the first vendor to introduce temaki and poke to Amsterdam. Plus, Meneer Temaki uses sustainable fish in all their dishes. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 The first location of The Butcher opened in 2012 near one of Amsterdam’s outdoor markets, Albert Cuyp Market. After two years of turning out top-notch burgers, The Butcher was included in the first group of De Foodhallen vendors so that visitors would never be without a healthy dose of Aberdeen Angus beef. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 For pizza created with ingredients straight from Italy, look to Renato’s Pizzeria. After refining its Italian cuisine at two other Amsterdam locations, Renato’s brought its talents to De Foodhallen. Tucked deep into a corner of De Foodhallen, Renato’s uses only the best buffalo mozzarella for its thin-crust pies. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Once you’re done with savory snacks, you’ll probably want something sweet. At I-Scream Waffle, you can indulge in an egg waffle filled with ice cream, and at Yoghurt Barn, you can experience traditional Dutch yogurt with a variety of toppings and mixers. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Yoghurt Barn knows that the Dutch eat the most yoghurt per capita and that De Foodhallen wouldn’t be complete without it. At locations around the Netherlands, Yogurt Barn serves all kinds of organic yogurt, from traditional farmer yogurt to frozen yogurt to soy yogurt. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 All good food needs good drinks to go with it. For that, De Foodhallen offers four bars scattered throughout the space. The big square bar in the center of the first room pours everything from coffee and soft drinks to beer and mixed drinks. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 The other three bars are specialized. G&T mixes a menu of classic and innovative gin and tonics with a variety of local and international gins, while Winebar pours reds and whites from all over the world, and expert servers are available to offer guidance. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
 Food and drink aren’t the only reasons to come to De Foodhallen. On Tuesday evenings, live bands play for guests and on Friday and Saturday nights, there is a DJ spinning music until the wee hours of the morning. Morgan Goldberg, for USA TODAY
Last SlideNext Slide

De Foodhallen, the Netherlands’ first indoor food market, is one of the many occupants of De Hallen, a restored former tram depot built in the early 1900s. Once a hub for the first electric trams, it is now a cultural center in Amsterdam's up-and-coming neighborhood, Oud-West.
De Hallen is home to a branch of the Openbare Bibliotheek Amsterdam, the city’s public library, a movie theatre called De Filmhallen, a hotel, a bicycle shop, a local goods store and, of course, De Foodhallen.
Opened in October 2014, De Foodhallen serves everything from bao buns to burgers at 21 active food stalls on the lofty third hall of De Hallen. It is accessed from the main passage, a long, brick corridor lined with green metal doors that are reminiscent of early 20th-century transportation stations.
Dishing out artisanal bites to locals and travelers seven days a week, De Foodhallen is the brainchild of four college friends, Chong Chu, Tsibo Lin, Zing-Kyn Cheung and Rakish Gangapersad, who conceived of the idea about eight years ago.
“Our inspiration came from Madrid," says Cheung. "There is a food market there that is a bit different than ours called Mercado de San Miguel.”
Mercado de San Miguel is a covered market in which vendors sell tapas, Spanish delicacies, baked goods and other foods. The four friends aspired to open a similar market with food stalls and bars in one common place. They all had jobs that they decided to quit so they could look for a location for their market. By luck and by accident, they found De Hallen and pitched the idea.
At the time, De Hallen had just been refurbished and there was a big space for hospitality that had not yet been spoken for. De Foodhallen was the perfect fit.
After nearly three years in operation, De Foodhallen has become known as not only a place to eat first-rate local and international cuisine, but also as a social center.
“I’ve always seen De Foodhallen as a more social concept with good food as well,” says Cheung, “You can hang there with friends and family. With a group of people, everyone can choose their own food.”
Click through the photos above for a taste of the beautiful Dutch food hall, and see more food market tours below.

 The entrance to the Time Out Market Lisboa celebrates its history as the Mercado da Ribeira. The main entrance faces Lisbon's busy Avenida 24 de Julho. Jake Emen, for USA TODAY
