10 great places where presidents liked to drink
In 1961, President John F. Kennedy convened with top British officials at Government House in Bermuda about the threat of nuclear war with the Soviet Union. During discussions, a top British scientist lightened the mood with his orders of gin and tonic. gov.bm
 Long before reality television, our commanders in chief were living it up on the Jersey Shore, summering and drinking at Congress Hall Hotel in Cape May, N.J. Guests included Franklin Pierce, Ulysses S. Grant, Benjamin Harrison and James Buchanan, considered the best drinker of all the presidents. caperesorts.com
Last SlideNext Slide

If politics drives you to drink, you’re not alone. While Donald Trump is said to be a teetotaler, most of our presidents indulged freely, says Mark Will-Weber, author of Mint Juleps with Teddy Roosevelt: The Complete History of Presidential Drinking (Regnery, $27.99.) “They drank for the same reasons that most of us drink. They were bored, they used it to socialize, or because of the burdens of the job.” In honor of President’s Day, he shares some favorite sites tied to presidential boozing with Larry Bleiberg for USA TODAY.
Congress Hall Hotel
 Cape May, N.J.
 Long before reality television, our commanders in chief were living it up on the Jersey Shore. While several presidents summered at the 201-year-old resort, including Franklin Pierce, Ulysses S. Grant and Benjamin Harrison, none indulged more than James Buchanan, considered the best drinker of all the presidents, Will-Weber says. “He could drink for hours and apparently not show any visible signs.” caperesorts.com
 The Emlen Physick Estate, which was completed in 1879, is the only official house-museum in Cape May, and the headquarters for the Mid-Atlantic Center for the Arts & Humanities, which sponsors tours and events celebrating the resort’s Victorian heritage. Mid-Atlantic Center for the Arts & Humanities
Last SlideNext Slide
Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park
 Texas
 Before widespread awareness about the dangers of mixing alcohol and driving, Lyndon Baines Johnson used to do both on his Hill Country ranch. He would often cruise around the property drinking bottles of Pearl beer or Cutty Sark from a plastic cup. “If someone said ‘Mr. President, you’re going pretty fast,’ he’d hold his 10-gallon hat over the speedometer,” Will-Weber says. nps.gov/lyjo
Ronald Reagan Lounge
 Simi Valley, Calif.
 Ronald Reagan celebrated his Irish heritage during his presidency, sipping a Smithwick’s ale in his ancestral village of Ballyporeen. When the bar closed years later, it was relocated to the Reagan Presidential Library, and is once again serving drinks. reaganfoundation.org
City Tavern
 Philadelphia
 When the Continental Congress needed to blow off steam, they retreated to this watering hole near Independence Hall. John Adams, who become our second president, was a regular, Will-Weber says. “He was a big fan of this porter, a dark beer made by Robert Hare.” Philadelphia’s Yards Brewing Co. now brews a similar version called George Washington’s Tavern Porter. citytavern.com
Government House
 Bermuda
 Not even the threat of armageddon could stop the flow of drinks. Less than a year before the Cuban Missile Crisis, President John F. Kennedy convened with top British officials to discuss growing tensions with the Soviet Union. But England’s top atomic scientist Sir William Penney interrupted the talks to order gin and tonic. “For the rest of the discussions, the catch phrase that cracked everyone up was ‘Another gin-tonic please’,” Will-Weber says. The residence’s gardens are open to visitors during the summer. gotobermuda.com
Mount Vernon, Va.
Washington was not just a Founding Father, but a distiller as well. His whiskey-making enterprise has been diligently recreated at his Potomac River mansion, Mount Vernon. While the first president had a stern reputation, he could occasionally let his powdered hair down, Will-Weber says. “Once he had a couple drinks he became much more gregarious.” mountvernon.org
Harry S. Truman’s Little White House
 Key West
 The 33rd president acted like a college student on spring break when he headed south to Florida. He would often start his day with a pre-breakfast shot of bourbon, and likely indulged during nightly poker games, Will-Weber says. His landmark retreat has also hosted former presidents Dwight Eisenhower, Franklin Roosevelt, John Kennedy, Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton and William Howard Taft. trumanlittlewhitehouse.com
The Broadmoor
 Colorado Springs
 While George W. Bush didn’t indulge in office, he certainly did as a younger man. That changed after he celebrated his 40th birthday with multiple bottles of wine at one of the Rockies’ top resorts. The next morning, he went out and tried to jog and only got about a half mile, and he swore it off, Will-Weber says. “His wife was all for it.” broadmoor.com
Ollie Hayes Bar
 Moneygall, Ireland
 Like Reagan, Barack Obama celebrated his Irish roots on his mother’s side with a visit to the village of Moneygall. After quickly downing a pint of Guinness, he was celebrated across the country. “It was a huge deal,” Will-Weber says. “He puts his money on the bar and says ‘The president always pays his bar bill.’ Obama made short work of it.” olliehayesbar.com
The Golden Tiger
 Prague
 In 1994, Bill Clinton met with Czech Republic President Vaclav Havel, who took him to a working-class pub in Prague, a city famous for its pilsner. The two threw back several pints, and the next morning, Clinton felt the effects, deciding to skip his early morning jog. Clinton, who wrote about his stepfather’s alcoholism, isn’t known for drinking though, Will-Weber says. “He is actually pretty moderate.” uzlatehotygra.cz/en
 This image from Feb. 29, 1909, shows some of the many travelers who passed through Washington Union Station to attend inauguration festivities for William Howard Taft, the nation’s 27th president. As they looked out the main doors of the building, these visitors, just like those today, would see the soaring Capitol dome in the near distance. A major snowstorm blanketed the city in almost a foot of snow the day before the March 4 inauguration. As a result, the ceremony was relocated to the Senate Chamber in the Capitol. It wasn’t until 1937 that the presidential inauguration was moved to January. Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division
 On Jan. 2, 1929, President Calvin Coolidge and his wife Grace (center) arrive at Union Station following a vacation on Sapelo Island, a barrier island off the central Georgia coast. In 2014, Amtrak’s daily Vermonter (Washington-St. Albans, Vt.) started serving Northampton, Mass., the community where Coolidge began practicing law in 1895 and later married Grace. The city is home to the Calvin Coolidge Presidential Library and Museum. Harris & Ewing/Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division
 President Franklin Delano Roosevelt arrives at Washington Union Station after a trip to his retreat in Warm Springs, Ga., in April 1939. The community was the site of the Warm Springs Foundation, which Roosevelt created in the late 1920s as the nation’s first hospital devoted solely to the treatment of those suffering from polio. Roosevelt, who lost some mobility after contracting polio in 1921, would visit Warm Springs until the end of his life. His cottage there became known as the “Little White House,” and he died in Warm Springs in April 1945. Harris & Ewing/Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division
 This is one view of the famous scene in which a jubilant Harry Truman holds a copy of the "Chicago Daily Tribune" with the erroneous headline “Dewey Defeats Truman.” It was Nov. 3, 1948, the day after Truman won an upset victory over Thomas Dewey, his Republican challenger. Truman’s photo was taken at St. Louis Union Station while he was returning by train from his home in Independence, Mo., to Washington, D.C. Truman was probably one of the most famous presidential railroaders. During his 1948 whistle-stop tour, he traveled more than 28,000 miles and delivered about 350 speeches. On that journey, he used the Ferdinand Magellan, a 1928 Pullman car that had been specially outfitted with armor plate and bullet-resistant glass for use by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Truman’s campaign train typically had 17 cars, including diners, lounges and sleepers. Harry S. Truman Library & Museum
 This image likely dates to March 1946, when former British Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill came to the United States to give a speech at Westminster College in Fulton, Mo. In that address, he described how “an iron curtain” had divided Europe and created an eastern sphere under the influence of the Soviet Union – the speech became a defining moment of the early Cold War era. President Harry S. Truman accompanied Churchill to Missouri. They are shown here at Washington Union Station on the rear platform of a train operated by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. Abbie Rowe, Harry S. Truman Library
 All throughout his political career as a senator, vice president and finally president of the United States, Harry S. Truman kept his home in Independence, Mo. He passed through the town’s 1913 Missouri Pacific Railroad station, shown here, hundreds of times. In this November 1952 image, Truman and daughter Margaret stand on the rear-end of the train car as a group of news reporters gather round. The city, served by Amtrak’s daily Missouri River Runner (St. Louis-Kansas City), is home to the Truman family house and the Truman Library and Museum. The depot is listed on the National Register of Historic Places for its architectural integrity and associations with the president. In the late 1980s, a group of civic minded residents formed the “Friends of the Truman Depot” to raise money to restore the building. Harry S. Truman Library & Museum
 President John F. Kennedy and first lady Jacqueline Kennedy arrive at Washington Union Station on Oct. 1, 1963, to greet Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie I. The emperor was on an official state visit to the United States and would also stop in Philadelphia and New York City, where he addressed the United Nations. In Washington, the Kennedys held a White House dinner for Selassie. The platform is lined with ambassadors from African nations including Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Tunisia and of course, Ethiopia. Robert Knudsen, White House Photographs/John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston
 First lady Jacqueline Kennedy shakes hands with Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie I on the platform at Washington Union Station. Mrs. Kennedy would present the bouquet of red roses, tied with a patriotic ribbon, to Princess Hirut Desta, the emperor’s granddaughter, who is shown in the white hat walking down the steps of the train. Cecil Stoughton, White House Photographs/John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston
 Over the years, many first ladies have hit the campaign trail for their husbands. In October 1964, Lady Bird Johnson took a four-day, eight-state tour of the Southeast on behalf of President Lyndon Johnson, who had assumed office following the death of John F. Kennedy. The aptly titled Lady Bird Special left Washington on Oct. 6, and three days later, as shown in this photograph, the president embraced his wife at the close of the trip in New Orleans. Those invited to ride the train enjoyed Southern dishes including Virginia country ham and Georgia griddle cakes. Customers aboard the Amtrak Carolinian (Charlotte-New York) and Piedmont (Charlotte-Raleigh) trains trace much of Lady Bird’s route through North Carolina. Cecil Stoughton, Lyndon Baines Johnson Library
 President Richard Nixon and first lady Pat Nixon traveled aboard Penn Central’s new high-speed Metroliner in January 1970. They took the train from Washington's Union Station to Philadelphia's 30th Street Station to attend a concert at the famed Academy of Music. Introduced a year earlier, the Metroliner service used new self-propelled electric cars built by the Budd Company in partnership with Westinghouse and General Electric. When Amtrak began operations in May 1971, it took over the Metroliner service and soon increased daily frequencies to keep up with demand. About a month after this September 1970 photo of the president was taken in the Oval Office, he signed the Rail Passenger Service Act creating Amtrak. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum; Amtrak
 On May 15, 1976, President Gerald Ford and first lady Betty Ford took a whistle-stop tour across the president’s home state of Michigan. Dubbed the Presidential Express, the special train ran from Flint to Niles, with an extended lunch stop in the state capital of Lansing. Here the couple waves from the back of an Amtrak car at Durand, which is still served by the daily Blue Water (Chicago-Port Huron). In October, during the closing days of the campaign against Jimmy Carter, the Fords toured Illinois aboard another Amtrak charter train called The Honest Abe. It was made up of two P-30 locomotives, seven new Amfleet cars and an observation car with an open-end platform. Ricardo Thomas, Gerald R. Ford Library
 The Peanut Special was a charter train that carried approximately 380 supporters of President-elect Jimmy Carter from his hometown of Plains, Ga., to Washington, D.C., for his 1977 inauguration. Passengers boarded at the old Plains depot, which had served as Carter's national campaign headquarters.The train consisted of three SDP40F locomotives pulling three coaches, eight 11-bedroom sleepers, three 10-6 sleepers, lounge car, dining car, kitchen-dormitory and a sleeper-lounge. In a nod to Carter’s Georgia roots, passengers enjoyed special lunch and dinner menus – shown here – peppered with Southern favorites including peanut soup, baked sugar-cured Georgia ham and peach ice cream. Amtrak/Ann Owens Collection
 Against the backdrop of a large American flag, President Ronald Reagan gives a thumbs-up to supporters at what appears to be Dayton Union Station. On Oct. 12, 1984, Reagan campaigned aboard a 13-car charter train – called the Heartland Special – between the western Ohio communities of Dayton and Perrysburg, located just south of Toledo. The train consist was a mix of Amtrak Amfleet and Heritage equipment and private cars. Ronald Reagan Presidential Library
 When the whistle-stop tour paused in Deshler, Ohio, early in the evening, Reagan addressed the large crowd from the open-end platform of the Ferdinand Magellan, a car used by earlier presidents. Reagan was not the first president or candidate to make a whistle-stop in Deshler. The list includes Presidents William Howard Taft, Harry S. Truman and Richard Nixon. Ronald Reagan Presidential Library
 President George H.W. Bush waves to a crowd outside Bowling Green, Ohio, during a September 1992 whistle-stop tour through Ohio and Michigan. The charter train was part of what the Bush re-election team called the “Spirit of America” tour. Bush started his trip in Columbus, Ohio, where his father was born and his grandfather ran Buckeye Steel, which had made railcar couplings. Susan Biddle, George Bush Presidential Library
 President Bill Clinton, shown here with first lady Hillary Clinton and daughter Chelsea, kicked off a whistle-stop tour in Huntington, W. Va., on Aug. 25, 1996. Clinton’s charter train, known as The 21st Century Express, would stop at communities in West Virginia, Kentucky, Ohio, Michigan and Indiana. The tour ended in Chicago where the Democratic National Convention was underway. The 13-car train was pulled by three Amtrak P-40 locomotives and included a mix of Amtrak bi-level Superliner cars – generally used on western long-distance trains – and historic equipment. The Clintons stand on the rear observation platform of the Georgia 300, built by Pullman Standard in 1930. Over the years, the private car has hosted trips for Presidents Jimmy Carter, George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama. William J. Clinton Presidential Center
 In 2009, President-elect Barack Obama and Vice President-elect Joe Biden, and their families, arrived for their inauguration via the nation’s busiest rail line –the Northeast Corridor (Washington-New York-Boston). Chartered by the 2009 Presidential Inauguration Committee, the special train was used for a whistle-stop tour between Philadelphia and Washington that traversed part of the rail route traveled by Abraham Lincoln to his 1861 inauguration. In this photograph, the charter train has stopped in Wilmington, Del., where the Bidens boarded for the southbound journey. Obama and Biden are shown on the open-end platform of the Georgia 300, a historic private car. Bob Johnston
 Rich with presidential history, the Ferdinand Magellan is a 1928 Pullman car that was specially refurbished for Franklin Roosevelt and subsequently used by Presidents Truman and Eisenhower. In this official capacity, it was known as U.S. Car No. 1. The car was outfitted in the early 1940s with armor plate and bullet-resistant glass, as well as two escape hatches. President Truman used the car extensively during his 1948 whistle-stop tour as he sought re-election. Declared a National Historic Landmark in 1985, the Ferdinand Magellan is now in the collection of the Gold Coast Railroad Museum in Miami. Cully Waggoner, Gold Coast Railroad Museum
 Among the vice presidents and presidential candidates Amtrak has transported is Vice President Joe Biden. While in the U.S. Senate, he often commuted between his home in Wilmington, Del., and the capital via Amtrak. On February 6, 2014, Biden helped celebrate the unveiling of the first of 70 new Amtrak Cities Sprinter (ACS-64) locomotives at Philadelphia's 30th Street Station. Here Amtrak Locomotive Engineer Rick Stolnis, right, gives an overview of the ACS-64 cab controls to Biden and U.S. DOT Secretary Anthony Foxx. Chuck Gomez, Amtrak
 Washington Union Station is the second busiest station in the Amtrak national system, welcoming more than 5 million customers in 2016. Approximately 100,000 visitors a day pass through the busy intermodal hub. Shown here sometime prior to 1932, the station is a soaring neoclassical masterpiece designed by famed architect and planner Daniel Burnham. Since its completion in 1908, it has welcomed numerous presidents and foreign and national dignitaries, as well as played host to inaugural balls. Union Station was a key element in a City Beautiful plan to remake the nation's capital at the dawn of the 20th century. Burnham’s station brought the five railroads serving the city into one terminal and resulted in the removal of rail lines from the Mall.The far eastern end of the building (right in this image), originally contained a private, secure waiting room for the president and his visitors. Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division
 The desire for a secure waiting room for the president and dignitaries was strongly influenced by the assassination of President James A. Garfield in 1881. On July 2, Charles Guiteau shot Garfield at the busy Baltimore and Potomac Railroad station on the Mall (the site is now occupied by the West Building of the National Gallery of Art); the president survived until late September. Union Station’s Presidential Suite, shown here, featured walls with colorful decorative finishes and three bronze chandeliers that gave off a soft glow. A separate entrance to the tracks allowed the president to avoid the public areas of the station. Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, Detroit Publishing Company Collection
 Alcoves in the Presidential Suite hold eagles with their wings outstretched to show off finely detailed feathers. The majestic birds are draped in wreaths of oak leaves. The strong but slow-growing oak tree is a symbol of power and longevity, so its use makes perfect sense in this setting. The acorns would remind visitors that great things, with patience, can be achieved from humble beginnings. During the rehabilitation of the station in the 1980s, skilled craftspeople restored the grand public spaces to their 1908 appearance. This eagle was repainted white with silver leaf detailing. Carol M. Highsmith, Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division
 During World War II, the Presidential Suite was transformed into a lounge run by the United Services Organization (USO), which was formed in 1941 to support members of the U.S. Armed Services. Soldiers were welcome to relax in the lounge while waiting for trains. They might read a magazine, write a letter home, learn about local attractions, take a nap or converse with fellow soldiers and USO volunteers. The lounge closed after the war but was reopened in 1951 by President Harry Truman. This 1968 view shows modern furniture arranged in cozy groupings. Today the USO operates in approximately 180 locations around the world. Jack E. Boucher, Historic American Buildings Survey
 The Presidential Suite hosted numerous national and foreign dignitaries over the years, including King George VI and Queen Elizabeth of the United Kingdom, King Prajadipok of Siam, and Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia. Pictured here in front of the ceremonial entrance to the suite is Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VIII) (center left), during a visit to Washington that began on Nov. 11, 1919 –the first Armistice Day. To his left is Vice President Thomas Marshall. The Prince of Wales visited the United States following a three-month tour of Canada. On Nov. 14 he met with President Woodrow Wilson, who was recovering from a stroke. Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division
 Former President Theodore Roosevelt is shown outside the Presidential Suite in 1918, greeting a crowd of onlookers. He would die early the next year at Sagamore Hill, his home on Long Island. Then-President Roosevelt signed the 1903 law that authorized construction of Washington Union Station, and it was completed toward the end of his second term. His successor, President William Howard Taft, would be the first to use the Presidential Suite. Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division
