Former Redskins GM McCloughan says Cousins is a good player but not special
145 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 23, 2018 11:09 am ET  Follow @LakeLewis  
Just a few short years ago the Washington Redskins hired Scot McCloughan as their general manager and he held the fans trust with his every word. The team had not had a personnel figure in this capacity for some time so, whenever McCloughan spoke, people listened… especially regarding his talent evaluation prowess. Unfortunately for McCloughan, he was relieved of his duties after the 2016 season ended.
The former GM gained the attention of Redskins fans and Pro Bowl quarterback Kirk Cousins’ supporters recently by offering his assessment of the three-time 4,000-yard passer.
As Washington enters the offseason with one of the biggest story lines in all of pro football (Cousins’ contract status), McCloughan put forward his opinion on the former Michigan State star’s talent via 104.3 The Fan in Denver per the Washington Post.
“He’s a good player,” McCloughan told on-air host Mike Pritchard and Cecil Lammey. “Is he special? I don’t see special. But also, we were still building a roster around him to make him special. [Redskins coach] Jay Gruden does a great job play-calling. [L.A. Rams coach and former Redskins offensive coordinator] Sean McVay did a great job play-calling to put him in positions to be successful. He’s talented. Talent is good at quarterback in the NFL. He’s won games. I know his record overall is not over .500. I know he has not won a playoff game. But he’s competitive. He works his tail off. He’s so methodical. Every day he has planned out. He’s always in the building, he’s always watching tape, he’s always talking to coaches, he was talking to me. From the standpoint of the tangibles, they’re excellent. You just need to have some talent around him because you don’t want him to be throwing the ball 35 to 40 times to win the game. You want to have a running game, have a good defense, good [special] teams, and then let him do what he does.”
The former GM went on to say that Cousins is looking for the right fit in a team where he can be successful.
“I can promise you this,” McCloughan said. “He has done his homework, probably too much, about each roster, who his receivers are, who his backs are, who his O-linemen are, who the coach is. Not just the head coach, but the coordinator, position coach, the system they run. I promise you he has notebook after notebook for each team. He is very, very intellectual about knowing what’s best for him. He understands he’s getting older, he’s been in the league a little bit. He wants to win. I know that. Personally, knowing him, it’s not about the money. It’s about the right fit, where he knows he has stability, he has good coaches, he has good players and he has a chance to be successful. I don’t blame him. He’s put himself in that situation with what he’s done the last three years.”
It will be interesting to see if Cousins and his representatives think that ideal fit remains with the Redskins… the only team for which he has competed since entering the NFL back in 2012.
Like this article?
Sign up for the Redskins Wire email newsletter to get our top stories in your inbox every morning
 Thanks for signing up.
 You'll be waking up a little more awesome tomorrow. 
 Something went wrong.
