Trump’s surprise win leaves a nation unnerved: Our view
CONNECTTWEET 11 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Millions of Americans awoke Wednesday wondering whether they even recognized their country any more. A nation that had only recently elected and re-elected its first African-American president had chosen as his successor someone who made racial grievance a central theme of his candidacy. How could that be?
“Whitelash” against President Obama was undoubtedly a piece of the hidden vote that helped propel Donald Trump to his unexpected victory over Hillary Clinton. But most of Trump’s supporters were registering their dissatisfaction with the status quo in Washington, their insecurity with globalization, and their disdain for elites who seem to have an answer to everything and a solution to nothing.
To register this emphatic statement against immigration and free trade — the American equivalent of Britain’s shocking “Brexit” vote — they were willing to rationalize Trump’s nasty, impulsive tendencies and his complete lack of experience in government or the military.
Trump was not this Editorial Board’s choice to be president. In fact, we expressed grave reservations about his fitness for office. Those concerns remain, particularly in the national security arena, where presidents have fewer constraints on their power.
More than any president in memory, Trump will need wise hands at his side. For this reason, it is vital for the Republican foreign policy experts who have scorned him to come forward to help. Entrusting the nuclear codes to a naturally combative man with an inability to ignore slights is a frightening prospect. So is Trump’s troubling admiration for Russia’s Vladimir Putin and other autocrats.

But Trump is the person chosen by the American people. And, in our democracy, that is reason enough to accept the result. Those who voted against him should assume the role of loyal, constructive opposition and work peacefully within the system.
On Wednesday, Trump, Clinton and Obama all set the right tone in trying to calm an unnerved nation, steady the financial markets, and pave the way for a peaceful transition of power following an unusually divisive, mean-spirited campaign.
In his late-night victory speech, Trump struck an uncharacteristically conciliatory chord, congratulating Clinton for a hard-fought campaign and promising to seek unity. Clinton responded with a gracious concession, saying she hopes that Trump “will be a successful president for all Americans.” Obama reinforced the message, noting that all Americans have a stake in the new president’s performance.
At least on domestic policy, the nation is blessed by its Founding Fathers with a system of checks and balances. It has an independent judiciary and a legislative branch to restrain the more destructive initiatives of an ill-prepared president. Trump would, for instance, likely run up against opposition should he try to prosecute Clinton or ban foreign Muslims from entering the country.
With Republicans retaining control of both chambers of Congress, Trump has a clearer path toward rolling back Obamacare, killing proposed trade deals and naming a Supreme Court justice to replace the late Antonin Scalia.
But Trump will also face many challenges on the political and economic front, finding that many of his proposals are unworkable. In fact, many of them are not so much proposals as aspirations.
He will not, for instance, be able to snap his fingers and bring back manufacturing jobs. His failure to deliver on his grandiose promises threatens to leave his supporters even more disillusioned about politics than they already are.
What do they have to lose? We are about to find out.
USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

CONNECTTWEET 11 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2fC0bj5
