Is there a real possibility Kevin Love won't be on LeBron's All-Star team?
By January 24, 2018 2:45 pm  Follow @ninamandell  
 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 24, 2018 2:45 pm  Follow @ninamandell  
LeBron James and Steph Curry, as part of the new All-Star format will select their teams from the pool of players voted as starters and selected as reserves — no matter what conference they’re in. Or even if they’re on the same team.
And as the drama continues to swirl around Kevin Love and how he’s getting along with his teammates in the soap opera known as the Cleveland Cavaliers, it seems that Love and James may be going against each other in the game.
Love, 15 hours after congratulating his teammate for scoring 30,000 points tweeted this about his childhood teammate, Klay Thompson. Who happens to play on the Warriors with Curry, the other All-Star team captain.
 Would be special to end up on the same All-Star team as @KlayThompson …our families have been friends for a long time. Crazy that it’s even a possibility. Just a thought!!!
 — Kevin Love (@kevinlove) January 24, 2018
Wait, why would he say this? ESPN’s Dave McMenamin has some more details on the latest saga:
 Last night Kevin said LeBron hadn’t given him the assurance he’d be drafting him yet: “He’s going to try to assemble the best team possible. I mean, he probably has a future in that, so I assume he’ll put together a damn good team. But so will Steph. Those are two smart guys.” https://t.co/yVavkPygGy
 — Dave McMenamin (@mcten) January 24, 2018
This potential mess (which really is simultaneously the worst-case and funniest result of the change to the All-Star Game) is just the latest chapter in the drama going on in Cleveland. Love reportedly was accused in a team meeting of not actually being sick when he said he was sick and his teammates seemed to forget to help him off the floor last night.
Last month, James offered this in what he was looking for in an All-Star teammate:
“We’re all grown men,” James told reporters last month. “It doesn’t stop your paycheck from coming. It won’t stop you from playing time when the season starts. Trying to win. Listen, just trying to win in the All-Star Game. You want to get the best player, the best caliber of player. You’re going to have some type of faithfulness, obviously, to your teammates. But also you want to compete.”
  Former Browns coach says he couldn't 'smell smells and see colors' after coaching the team  
 January 24, 2018 2:50 pm · 
Mike Pettine took a two-year vacation after his time in Cleveland. 

 38m 
  Impossible video game will make you want to throw your phone into a brick wall  
 January 24, 2018 2:41 pm · 
“Trap Adventure 2” looks like the most frustrating thing ever created. 

 1hr 
  San Antonio's Danny Green shows off his massive pet snakes  
 January 24, 2018 2:04 pm · 
Danny Green shares his home with a dog and two huge snakes. 

 1hr 
  Cleveland radio host bizarrely rips Joe Thomas for daring to have a podcast  
 January 24, 2018 1:49 pm · 
This is the worst take. 

 1hr 
  Tiger Woods has the best choice for a walk-up song  
 January 24, 2018 1:45 pm · 
Also: Let’s get walk-up songs into golf. 

 1hr 
  Why Danica Patrick says she'd help her ex, Ricky Stenhouse Jr., at Daytona 500  
 January 24, 2018 1:44 pm · 
Patrick announced in December that she and Stenhouse broke up after almost five years together. 

 1hr
