'Downton Abbey' exhibit lets fans go upstairs, downstairs with drama's sets, costumes
CLOSE

 Hugh Bonneville reveals the much hoped for movie spin-off of "Downton Abbey" is not off the ground yet, but he adds: "never say never." (Aug. 22) AP

For Americans who never received an invitation to Downton Abbey —- meaning everyone outside of Cora Crawley's Yankee family — there's a second chance. The beloved PBS Masterpiece drama, which ended its six-season run last year, is coming to America.
Downton Abbey: The Exhibition opens Nov. 18 for a limited engagement in New York before traveling throughout the country, NBCUniversal International Studios announced.
The exhibition, described as a "fully immersive experience," promises to connect fans to the Downton characters, costumes, locations and events of England's post-Edwardian era, from World War I to the Roaring Twenties.

Visitors, who likely miss the show as much as cast and producers do, will get an upstairs/downstairs look at the Crawley family estate, walking through re-creations of sets that will take them into the kitchen, servants' hall, Carson's pantry, Lady Mary's bedroom and the dining room. 
More than 50 costumes worn by Michelle Dockery, Hugh Bonneville, Maggie Smith and other Downton stars will be on display. They include Lady Mary's and Lady Edith's wedding dresses, Mary's Season 2 two proposal dress and Rose’s royal presentation dress.
Costumes were curated by Anna Robbins, who was the costume designer for seasons 5 and 6.

Artifacts on display include the bell board from the servants’ dining room and telegrams informing Lord Grantham of the sinking of the Titanic and outbreak of war with Germany.
The exhibit also will "showcase never-before-seen footage."
In a statement, Michael Edelstein, president of NBCUniversal International Studios, said "Downton Abbey: The Exhibition continues this extraordinary legacy and gives viewers an exclusive invitation inside the series’ beloved characters, storylines and sets.”

In New York, the exhibition will take residence at 218 W. 57th St. in Manhattan. Ticket prices, which start at $30 for adults and $15 for children, can be purchased at www.downtonexhibition.com. 
More U.S. locations will be announced at a later date.
CONNECTTWEET 5 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2yI2QQ3
