Texas cop fired after fatally shooting 15-year-old
Corrections and clarifications: In earlier versions, the gender of Aubrey Hooper was incorrect.
BALCH SPRINGS, Texas — A police officer who fatally shot a teenager with a rifle has been fired amid an emotionally charged investigation, police confirmed Tuesday.
The Balch Springs Police Department said that Officer Roy Oliver was fired for violating department policies. The firing came hours after the victim's family called the killing a "violent, senseless, murder."
Police in this city of about 25,000 people, 15 miles east of Dallas, were responding to a report of intoxicated teens at a party when officers heard gunfire outside. Initially, Balch Springs Police Chief Jonathan Haber said a car was backing up toward officers on the street when an officer armed with a rifle shot Jordan Edwards, 15, a passenger in the car.
Haber corrected the story in a news conference late Monday, saying video from the scene shows the car initially backing up, but then moving forward and fleeing the scene when Jordan was shot in the head.
The chief said that what he saw on the video was not "consistent with the policies and core values of the Balch Springs Police Department."
The Dallas County Medical Examiner classified the teen's death as a homicide by rifle wound to the head.
Jordan's family issued a statement Tuesday thanking the community for its support. The statement described Jordan as "loving, humble and sharing" and said the impact on his siblings was immense.
"No one, let alone young children, should witness such horrific, unexplainable, violence," the statement said.
The family said it did not condone violence or threats against police and asked that no protests or marches be held while funeral preparations are underway.
"What we desire only second to having our beloved Jordan back, is JUSTICE FOR JORDAN," the statement said.
Read more:
The family's lawyer, Lee Merritt, said there was no reason for police to shoot at the car. Oliver, who was hired by the force in July of 2011, was initially put on administrative leave.
"There can be, there is no, there will be no justification," Merritt said. "We are declaring war on bad policing. This is happening far too often."
NAACP Dallas President Aubrey Hooper said Jordan's death was a tragedy that could have been avoided. He said the policing practices seemed "excessive. "
"There are best practices in (the) law enforcement profession that do not involve the use of deadly force," he said.
The Mesquite school district issued a statement saying Jordan was a good student who was "very well-liked by his teachers, coaches and fellow students."
Family and friends gathered for a vigil Monday night on ball fields near Mesquite High School.

"Our dreams started here," said Braylon Monroe, a best friend to Edwards who said he and other friends played ball and grew up on those fields.
Alandre Henderson, another friend, said he had gone to the party and had ridden in a car with Edwards. He wasn't there when the shooting happened, he said, adding that it "hurts to see my brother get shot."
The Dallas County District Attorney’s Office said its civil rights team will conduct an "impartial and independent investigation." The police chief made a similar promise. He said he had spoken with Jordan's family.
"My heart just skips a beat," he said. "From one father to another, I can't even express what they are going through."
Panicker reported from the scene for WFAA-TV, Dallas-Fort Worth; Bacon for USA TODAY from McLean, Va.
CONNECTTWEET 162 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2qukqU9
