An early look at the 10 players who could headline NFL free agency in 2017
Friday's deadline to sign franchised players to long-term contracts brought this year's NFL free agency period to an unofficial close. Several of those tagged players wound up playing on a one-year tender, but they — and many of their peers — will have another opportunity to test the market in 2017. Here's a look at the 10 players who may headline next year's free agent class:
1. Kirk Cousins, QB, Washington Redskins: He's set to earn $19.95 million with the franchise tag in 2016. If Cousins strings together another stellar season, the 'Skins are more likely to re-tag him and then negotiate a multi-year deal than allow the soon-to-be-28-year-old hit the open market. But even if Cousins struggles, he'll almost certainly cash in somewhere.
2. Kawann Short, DT, Carolina Panthers: He blossomed into a game wrecker in 2015, his third season, posting a career-best 11 sacks while establishing himself as a force in front of star LBs Luke Kuechly and Thomas Davis. Expect GM Dave Gettleman to make a bigger push to keep Short than he did CB Josh Norman.
3. Tyrann Mathieu, DB, Arizona Cardinals: If he hadn't torn both his anterior cruciate ligaments since 2013, he might be atop this list. Still, the erstwhile Honey Badger has established himself as one of the premier defenders in the league given his ability to play multiple positions and constantly get his hands on the ball.

4. Le'Veon Bell, RB, Pittsburgh Steelers: In three seasons, he's become one of the league's few elite backs, and his hands make him an every-down threat. However Bell has struggled with injuries and plays a position that exposes him to endless abuse, so his desire to make $15 million annually seems rather far-fetched. And reports of another suspension won't help his cause, either.
5. Alshon Jeffery, WR, Chicago Bears: A franchise player this year, his injury-plagued 2015 probably prevented him from prying a long-term commitment out of the Bears. But if Jeffery remains healthy and reverts to his 2013-14 form (17 receiving TDs and more than 2,500 yards), he'll get No. 1 wideout money somewhere.
6. Jamie Collins, LB, New England Patriots: His numbers don't jump off the stat sheet, but the 6-3, 250-pounder's athleticism and versatility are eye-popping and would be coveted by any defensive coordinator.
7. Tyrod Taylor, QB, Buffalo Bills: Assuming the New Orleans Saints get something done with Drew Brees — a near certainty — Taylor could be the next-best quarterback option after Cousins following his own breakout season in 2015. But like the Redskins, the Bills want to see their young signal caller prove his consistency first.
8. Stephon Gilmore, CB, Bills: Buffalo could face quite a conundrum with its 2017 franchise tag if it fails to lock up both Taylor and Gilmore. The latter has quietly developed into one of the league's most suffocating corners, which almost certainly means megadollars will eventually be earmarked for his bank account.
9. Chandler Jones, OLB, Cardinals: The Patriots' decision to trade him this offseason raised some eyebrows. But Jones has averaged nine sacks over his four NFL seasons, a skill that almost always translates into a valuable second contract, especially for a 26-year-old. After parting with a second rounder to get Jones, expect Arizona to make a strong offer if he maintains his production and avoids trouble.
10. Eric Berry, S, Kansas City Chiefs: It was surprising K.C. didn't hammer out a multi-year deal with its inspirational defensive leader after franchising him. But if the Chiefs don't pay Berry next year, someone will ante up for a player who plays an increasingly valuable position so effectively.
***
Follow Nate Davis on Twitter @ByNateDavis
PHOTOS: Offseason power rankings

 1. Cardinals: Arizona might not look like the typical preseason favorite, but the Cardinals appear to be the most well-rounded team at this point in the year. Mark J. Rebilas, USA TODAY Sports
