Apple's Tim Cook: I don't want my nephew on social media
Don't expect a ton of likes from Tim Cook when it comes to social media.
The Apple CEO recently visited Harlow College in the United Kingdom to promote the company's "Everyone Can Code" curriculum.
During an interview with The Guardian, he mentioned his nephew, and how he has already set boundaries on the technology he can consume.
CLOSE

 Speaking at The George Washington University's commencement ceremony, Apple CEO Tim Cook warned new graduates against sitting on the sidelines and listening to cynics. VPC
"There are some things that I won’t allow; I don’t want them on a social network," said Cook. The Guardian piece does not mention the age of Cook's nephew, but at the time of a 2015 Fortune feature on Cook, he said his nephew was 10 years old.
This is not the first time Cook has expressed concern over social media. In June 2016, Cook gave a commencement speech at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he warned about how social media can turn us "antisocial."
"Sometimes the very technology that is meant to connect us divides us," he said.
Interestingly, a big reason for social media's success is directly tied to Apple's iPhone, as more users enjoy their lives through their smartphone.
Social media companies such as Facebook and Twitter have been scrutinized since the 2016 presidential election, accused of spreading misinformation and fostering environments where users can be abused.
Last week, Facebook took a series of steps hoping to emphasize positive interactions and to cut back on the spread of news. The company said it was updating its News Feed to surface more posts with higher engagement. They also plan to use community guidance to highlight "trusted sources" for news that would likely appear more prominently.
Meanwhile, Twitter revealed it is exploring ways to reach out to users who may have been exposed to Russian propaganda. During a Senate Commerce hearing, Twitter's director of public policy, Carlos Monje, said the social media service is working to inform users who saw tweets from Russian-linked accounts spreading disinformation during the election.
For parents and caregivers seeking to set social media boundaries, here are some tips:
Consider a shared account. This allows parents to track what their kids do while using social media.
Establish boundaries early. Before even allowing them to have an account, make sure they know your ground rules. 
Start a conversation. Ask kids how they plan to use it, and who they plan to interact with on social media.
Follow Brett Molina on Twitter: @brettmolina23.
