New cruise ships for 2018: MSC Cruises' MSC Seaview
More than half a dozen cruise lines that market to North Americans are rolling out new oceangoing ships in 2018. Here, USA TODAY profiles one of the new offerings: MSC Cruises' MSC Seaview. For information on the year's other new vessels, return to the main page of our Guide to the New Cruise Ships of 2018.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
MSC SEAVIEW
Line: MSC Cruises
Maiden voyage: June 10
Home ports: Barcelona; Civitavecchia, Italy
Size (in tons): 153,516
Passengers: 4,132
The buzz: MSC Seaview is just the latest in a string of new ships for Europe-based MSC Cruises, which is the midst of a massive expansion. 
A sister to the two-month-old MSC Seaside, which just began sailing out of Miami, it'll boast a similar Miami-Beach condo style designed to resonate with the North American market. 
Purpose built for warm-water destinations such as the Caribbean and the Mediterranean, the 153,516-ton vessel will feature the same innovative, extra-wide promenades found on Seaside. Designed to offer passengers more interaction with the sea than on other large vessels, the promenades will jut over the sides of the ship, offering outdoor eating areas, lounge areas, spa stations and even an outdoor gym area.
Like Seaside, Seaview also will boast floor-to-ceiling glass windows and other elements in interior public areas designed to orient the shipboard experience toward the sea to a greater extent than on other large vessels.
Other outdoor features will include an Aqua Park with four water slides, including an interactive "slideboarding tube" that works in video game elements, lights and music, and one inner tube slide. The ship's top deck also will offer a ropes course called Adventure Trail and two of the longest zip lines at sea (at 394 feet).
In all, Seaview will have 11 eateries, including an upscale seafood outlet and a steakhouse.
While the vessel's 2,070 cabins will be able to hold 4,132 passengers at double occupancy, extra bed spots from pull-out sofas and pull-down bunks will boost the total capacity to 5,119 passengers.
Itineraries: Seven-night voyages in the Western Mediterranean starting at $538 per person.
Information: 844-243-9414; msccruisesusa.com.
