CNN Profiles - Terence Burke - Senior Vice President of National News - CNN
Terence Burke is senior vice president of national news. In that role, Burke oversees all of CNN's domestic newsgathering operations including CNN's national newsdesk, regional bureaus and CNN AIR (aerial imagery and reporting). His teams are responsible for rapid response to breaking news, and in-depth reporting and coverage of national stories. He has led the network's coverage on stories ranging from Superstorm Sandy's landfall on the New England coast to the protests and trial in the police shooting death of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, to Pope Francis' first visit to the United States. He also oversees the integration of unmanned aerial systems technology across all of CNN's networks and platforms.
Burke has an extensive background in both programming and newsgathering at CNN. He joined CNNfn in 1999, where he started as a writer and producer for business news segments in New York. In 2001, Burke transitioned to London writing for CNN International. He was quickly promoted to producer of CNNI's flagship program World Business Today, where he managed storytelling for the lead up to Iraq, the global financial turmoil in the wake of the 9/11 attacks, and Argentina's currency crisis.
From there, he produced the launch of Business International with Becky Anderson, a program geared to a European primetime audience focusing on global affairs, business and sports. He expanded his role into newsgathering as an editor on the London newsdesk, covering Europe's response and participation to the US-led war on Iraq.
In 2004, Burke moved to CNN world headquarters in Atlanta, working as an assignment editor and supervising editor on the International newsdesk, coordinating coverage of news events such as the death of Palestinian Leader Yasser Arafat, the war in Iraq, the 2005 Pakistan earthquake and the devastating 2005 south Asian tsunami. During this period, Burke also served as a senior producer and bureau director for CNN in Baghdad during the height of the war, responsible for leading editorial content and logistics for the bureau.
In 2007, he served as CNN International's New York-based senior producer, responsible for covering the United Nations, business, American politics and sports. During this time, he was one of the leaders of coverage of CNN's Peabody Award-winning coverage of the 2008 U.S. presidential campaigns and election, the global financial crisis, and the U.N.'s security council's response to the situation in the Middle East. In 2009, Burke expanded CNN International's presence in New York, developing a programming and newsgathering operation to bolster CNN International's editorial content, specifically for financial news. Working with the CNN New York domestic bureau and CNNMoney, he added a New York financial presence for World Business Today and Quest Means Business.
In 2010, Burke was a co-director of CNN's award-winning Haiti Earthquake coverage across all platforms and networks, initially responsible for arranging CNN's supply line into a devastated Port-au-Prince, and then hiring and integrating local staff into CNN's operation. 
In 2011, Burke served as one of CNN International's directors of coverage during the political uprisings in Egypt and Libya, including the fall of two dictatorships, as well as during the Japanese tsunami and subsequent nuclear crisis.
While at CNN, Burke was a participant in the CNN Fellowship leadership development program. He is active with the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society in New York and has organized an annual basketball tournament in honor of his father. He is also a supporter of the Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center at Duke University where his mother was treated.
Burke graduated from Columbia University with bachelor's in history. He is presently a fellow in Columbia University Journalism School's prestigious Sulzberger Program.
