Five things we learned playing 'The Last Guardian'
This is not a drill. This is not a fake news story. The Last Guardian is finally available.
Seven years after it was first revealed as a PlayStation 3 title during the Electronic Entertainment Expo, the Sony adventure game will make its long-awaited debut for the PlayStation 4 on Tuesday.
There is lots of reason for excitement for The Last Guardian, which stars a young boy and a dog-like beast named Trico. The game comes from revered game designer Fumito Ueda, best known for classic action adventure titles Ico and Shadow of the Colossus, considered among the best games during the PlayStation 2 era.
Could The Last Guardian survive seven years of hype? Here are five things we learned while playing:
1. It really does exist.
Maybe this is a ridiculous way to start, but there are a lot of video game players (myself included) that weren't sure we would ever play this game. It's real. And the screenshot of Trico and friend I took from my experience is proof. Now let's get to the important stuff.

2. You will absolutely adore Trico. 
The Last Guardian is so captivating because of how designers cultivate the relationship between your character -- a young boy with mysterious markings on his body -- and Trico, the beast with features resembling a bird, cat and dog. It starts within what looks like a fortress, as both the boy and Trico try to escape. Players will treat Trico like a pet: tending to wounds, feeding him, calling him to your location and petting him to calm down. Trico returns the favor by helping you reach difficult areas and attacking supernatural guards scattered through the fortress. Then there are the quiet moments, like one where Trico is playing in water, where you discover the strength of your bond.
3. Both the story and exploring feel organic.
It starts with players waking up next to a wounded, suspicious Trico — with no recognition of what happened. One you earn Trico's trust, players then seek their way out all while trying to understand how you got here and why there's a giant bird/cat/dog with you. The Last Guardian takes cues from earlier games like Ico in presenting a stripped-down experience. There is no heads-up display detailing your health or a mini-map to guide your way. Players figure it out by carefully studying the environment and looking around. Rays of sunlight may point toward the right path, and even Trico may sit and subtly direct you to the next destination. It's easy to stay drawn to the game's world. There were several times where I'd explore and suddenly realize I lost a couple hours. It's difficult to pull away.

4. Higher ground is your friend.
Probably the most important thing I learned while playing is the value of reaching a higher vantage point. Whether you climb a platform, or scale the feathery back of Trico (using gameplay mechanics similar to Shadow of the Colossus), getting a view from above often helps in figuring out where you need to go.
5. The camera and controls are two more beasts players must tame.
There are moments — enclosed spaces in particular — where it feels like you are wrestling with the camera to get the right angle and see where you're headed. Meanwhile, the controls can feel cumbersome. The limitations on movement make sense sometimes. Players should feel the struggle to climb to a ledge or carry a heavy barrel. It creates some dramatic scenes, not to mention you are a young boy, not a superhero. It's when you have to move from varying camera angles where it gets awkward. You think you pushed the thumbstick down but it doesn't register. Frustrating.
Are the camera and controls aggravating enough to kill the journey? So far, I'm too busy admiring Trico to worry.
Follow Brett Molina on Twitter: @brettmolina23.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2gI5nE3
