Takeout windows trend in America's food cities
“When it comes to signature dishes, it’s a toss-up between our Spicy Poke and the Aloha Poke for the base,” says McVearry. “I will say the signature activity our customers all do is to build their perfect bowl. Popular add-ins include masago, avocado, ginger and jalepenos.” Poké-Poké
 Family-run California Donuts has been operating for 34 years and keeps things fresh by continually coming up with new takes on the classic donut. Don’t get one similarly named California Donuts shop confused with another. The one to visit is in Koreatown, inspiring long lines at peak times at its walk-up takeout window. California Donuts
 A popular restaurant only open on Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights, from 9 p.m. to 2 a.m., The Spot on Pico serves Southern comfort food, like fried chicken, collard greens and blueberry cobbler. A favorite is the Porch Punch, made with apple juice and spiced with cinnamon. Joshua Lurie
 “At The Spot on Pico, we’re all about welcoming the community and giving back to the community,” says co-owner Melodee McKinney. “That is who we are. Every night it’s a melting pot of conversations, with customers of all ethnicities.” The Spot On Pico
 Burgerlords serves up classic cheeseburgers, many made from chuck, short rib and brisket, topped with cheese and Thousand Island dressing, with a side of shoestring fries. “As far as a signature burger, I'd have to go with our house-made vegan burger,” says co-owner Max Guerrero. “It’s a perfect blend of roasted vegetables, nuts, grain and a secret spice blend. There’s no cheap filler here, it’s all high quality ingredients with no preservatives.” Burgerlords
 Division 3 serves inspired cooking from a takeout window at a wood-paneled building in a residential area in Highland Park. “I took the neighborhood into great consideration when designing the concept and the menu,” says chef Matthew Dickson. “It's a crazy fun place.” Everything is packed to-go, but customers can amble back behind the building to a fenced in patio containing a few tables. Division 3
 ”We service the community with some amazing $4 biscuit sandwiches,” says chef Dickson, who prepares his own corned beef for 10 days before cooking, cures his own salmon, and uses real vanilla beans and fresh croissants for Division 3’s French toast in a cup. Division 3
 This West Hollywood favorite is situated on 3rd St. by The Churchill, a restaurant on the first floor of The Orlando Hotel. Most guests order and keep on truckin’, but there is the option for a zen moment enjoying your juice at one of four metal stools. You can also score breakfast until 4 p.m. Juice Served Here
 Some people come to Juice Served Here for the Verve coffee, some for the Churchill’s sandwiches, but it’s the juice which puts this takeout venue on the map, with concoctions like Field of Greens, Block Rockin Beets and The Pipe Cleaner. Juice Served Here
 In Studio City, Red Window Coffee serves all espresso drinks Aussie style. “Our signature coffee would be our Flat White,” says Leah Pringle, who owns Red Window with her husband Daniel. “It has African bittersweet drinking chocolate sprinkled on top of the espresso shot and again on top of the steamed milk. I would also suggest our 20-hour cold brew. It’s legit strong without the acidic smack down of most cold brews.” (Also find sushi and Tokyo rolls.) Red Window Coffee
 “Our philosophy at Red Window is to serve artisanal coffee at the highest quality level from farm to cup,” says co-owner Leah Pringle. There’s free parking on the south side of Ventura Blvd. and metered parking around the restaurant. Red Window Coffee
 Paramount Coffee Project is helmed by Australians Mark Dundon, Russell Bear and Jin Ng. The atmosphere is casually hip rather than tragically hip. Avocado on toast is a standout, made with Gjusta sourdough bread, avocado, pickled radish, watercress and toasted pine nuts. Paramount Coffee Project
