Jackson: Trump needs more than police to solve Chicago violence
CHICAGO — Civil Rights leader Rev. Jesse Jackson called on President Trump to back up his promise to fix Chicago’s violence problem with a surge of investment in some of the city’s most impoverished neighborhoods.
Speaking just hours after Trump offered his latest criticism of Chicago, Jackson said that some of Chicago’s neighborhoods hardest hit by the violence are in desperate need of jobs, improved schools and housing. He also cautioned Trump that law enforcement alone will not solve the rise in violence, which saw more than 760 murders and 4,300 shooting victims last year.
“His solution seems to be bring in more police,” Jackson said. “We need him to bring in the federal housing authority, federal labor, federal education and federal health care.”
Trump has repeatedly harangued Chicago officials over the spike in shootings and murders, aiming much of his criticism at Mayor Rahm Emanuel — a former Democratic congressman and White House chief of staff in President Obama’s administration. Chicago saw more murders than New York and Los Angeles combined last year -- the deadliest the city saw in more than two decades. So far this year, Chicago has recorded at least 54 murders, according to police department data.
On Tuesday, Trump again singled out Chicago during a meeting at the White House with sheriffs from around the country.
“If you ran Chicago, you would solve that nightmare, I'll tell you," Trump told the sheriffs. "I'll bet everybody in the room . . . would raise their hand, because to allow, I mean literally hundreds of shootings a month, it's worse than some of the places that we read about in the Middle East where you have wars going on."

It marked the fourth time in less than three weeks that Trump has publicly criticized Chicago’s handling of the surging violence. The president, in recent weeks, has described the violence in Chicago as “out of control” and as “horrible carnage,” while warning that he would “send in the Feds” if the city didn’t improve the situation.
Last week, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives confirmed that it is examining a variety options to address Chicago's deadly crime surge, including shifting a number of its agents to the city on permanent assignments.

But Jackson noted that a few predominantly African-American neighborhoods with high-poverty rates, low youth employment, and few job opportunities account for a disproportionate amount of the violence. Jackson said that the structural problems in those neighborhoods feed the violence, and must be addressed as part of a long-term cure.
“Don’t bring in 20 more ATF agents,” said Jackson, who spoke to reporters at a news conference in Chicago’s Austin neighborhood, an area that saw more homicides than any other community last year. “Bring in more federal resources beyond police.”
Other leaders in the city’s African-American community also urged the president to take a holistic approach to dealing with Chicago’s violence epidemic.
Rev. Ira Acree, a Chicago activist and pastor, called on Trump to visit the Austin neighborhood and see the issues for himself.
“Hiring more police, stopping the proliferation of guns and stiffer penalties for those illegally carrying guns will never drastically reduce violence in Chicago,” Acree wrote in a letter to the president. “That only addresses the symptoms of violence with minimal impact. What good is it to pour a cup of water in an ocean, when the levee is broken?"
Follow USA TODAY Chicago correspondent Aamer Madhani on Twitter: @AamerISmad
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2jZv8O6
