Celebrate New Year's Eve at these destinations and hotels
The end of 2017 is upon us and many parties are in the works to usher in the new year.
HotelTonight, the last-minute hotel deal app, has looked into which destinations are on the top of people’s list this New Year’s Eve.
Chicago has unseated New York as the top New Year’s Eve destination, according to HotelTonight’s analysis of its users’ searches. Palm Springs is also trending.
New York is still quite popular and many New Yorkers are staying put. Of New York City hotel bookers, 49% are locals, while 50% are out-of-towners.
Other top destinations for people looking for a hotel stay for the new year: Las Vegas, San Francisco, Boston, Miami, Los Angeles, New Orleans, and San Diego.
HotelTonight has advice for those looking for last-minute hotel deals for New Year’s Eve partying. Here are prime times to book at various destinations, according to the app's data:
Same day: Los Angeles, New York, Orange County, San Diego
The day before New Year’s Eve: Las Vegas
Four days before (Book on 12/28): Boston, Chicago, Miami
Five days before (Book on 12/27): San Francisco
USA TODAY has compiled a list of a few events last-minute packages for the start of the year. Here they are:
The Monarch Rooftop & Indoor Lounge in midtown Manhattan near Penn Station will have a New Year’s Eve party. Tickets are $175 for general admission, which includes premium open bar, a complimentary Champagne toast at midnight, party favors, and a live DJ performance. For more information, please visit Monarch’s website.
For high-rollers, there’s this: The Fontainebleau Miami Beach, will have a performance by Demi Lovato and KYGO. Ticket prices start at $275 for one general admission ticket, with private tables ranging from $4,000 to $40,000 for a stage-side private space for up to 25 guests. All tickets include access to a premium open bar until 12 a.m. The party will continue with performances by Grammy “Album of the Year” nominee, Travis Scott, at LIV nightclub inside the Fontainebleau. For the first time this year, Fontainebleau is offering a “Family Experience” package. The resort will turn La Côte, the resort’s Oceanside bistro, and the La Côte lawn into an extension of the poolside party where families can watch night’s performances by Demi Lovato and KYGO. There will be a gourmet buffet dinner and those 21 and over can have access to an open bar from 9 p.m. to midnight. Ticket prices start at $350 for one general admission ticket. Tickets and packages can be purchased online at fontainebleau.com/nye.
The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas has a number of performers for New Year’s eve: Foo Fighters, Duran Duran, Zac Brown Band, French Montana, DJ Mustard and Galantis. Tickets are available online at Cosmopolitanlasvegas.com.
Conrad New York is offering people a one hour open bar and canapes at 8 p.m. at the ATRIO Bar, followed by a 9 p.m. seating for a four-course prix-fixe menu. Guests can then head up to Loopy Doopy, Conrad New York’s rooftop bar with views of the Statue of liberty for a rooftop champagne toast at midnight and views of fireworks along the Hudson. The hotel is also offering guests a chance to learn to skate alongside former U. S. Olympians Melissa Gregory and Denis Petukhov at The Rink at Brookfield Place with the Skate with the Greats package.
Hyatt Regency New Orleans is offering packages to celebrate the 300th anniversary of the city. Starting at $299 per night, the hotel’s “Tricentennial Celebration” Package includes a 300-year commemorative keepsake and a daily food and beverage credit with a two-night minimum stay.

 Chicago was the fifth most booked domestic destination in 2017, according to Expedia. The Chicago River serves as the main link between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi Valley waterways. jessicakirsh, Shutterstock / jessicakirsh
