Analyzing Seahawks' hiring of Ken Norton Jr. as defensive coordinator
By January 16, 2018 9:30 am  Follow @tigerbulldog13  
 164 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 16, 2018 9:30 am  Follow @tigerbulldog13  
Signing a defensive coordinator when you already have one is strange. Signing a defensive coordinator who just took a job a week ago with a division rival is really strange.
Doing both at the same time is downright bonkers.
There’s a lot to unpack here. For starters, the status regarding current defensive coordinator Kris Richard is unclear. Richard was informed earlier in the offseason that he was free to interview for other jobs, and even interviewed for the Colts a few weeks ago.
However, the Colts appear to be going in a different direction and Richard, at least for now, appears to still be on staff for the Seahawks.
All signs point to Richard being let go, but it is certainly strange that that didn’t happen prior to Norton’s hiring. However, Norton’s hiring may have been rushed because of a unique stipulation in his contract.
Norton had an out clause in his contract with the 49ers, allowing him to break the deal if the Seahawks’ defensive coordinator job opened up.
 Statement from #49ers coach Kyle Shanahan on Ken Norton Jr.:
 "Last week, Ken was presented with an opportunity to once again coordinate a defense. Because of how we feel about Ken as a coach, we understand and respect his desire to pursue the position.”
 — Matt Maiocco (@MaioccoNBCS) January 15, 2018
Regardless of the strange circumstances, Seattle is getting a defensive coordinator who has extensive experience with coach Pete Carroll. Norton was the linebackers coach with Carroll at USC from 2004-2009, and jumped to Seattle with him in 2010. He remained there until 2014, when he took over as the Raiders defensive coordinator. He spent the last three seasons in Oakland before he was (briefly!) hired by the 49ers on Jan. 8.
Oakland didn’t have a lot of success on the defensive side of the ball in Norton’s tenure, finishing 26th in yards allowed per game during their 12-4 2016 season.
However, Norton is familiar with coach Carroll and the defensive schemes the Seahawks employ. He should be able to come right in without much of a learning curve.
For a defense that could be undergoing some dramatic changes, having a coach who is familiar with the Seahawks brand will be a big benefit for a team looking to start another playoff streak.
