Which 'Game of Thrones' character is Hillary? Column
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Even as Hillary Clinton makes the long-awaited announcement of her 2016 presidential candidacy, the HBO fantasy epic Game of Thrones begins its (also long-awaited) fifth season. Coincidence? I think not. After all, Game of Thrones is the ultimate politics-and-power tale of our time — even if it's set in a fictional version of the Middle Ages.
Granted, there are major differences between modern-day America and pseudo-medieval Westeros, the series' main location. In Westeros, stepping over dead bodies on your way up is a much more literal thing. In America, losers in the game of power are exiled to cushy private-sector jobs and the lecture circuit, not to a snowy, zombie-infested wasteland on the edge of the realm. And we have no public executions, except on Twitter. But surely in a larger sense, the game of power knows no place or time.
While Westeros is very much a man's world, Game of Thrones has plenty of powerful women who can play as well as any man. Which brings us to the question: If Hillary Clinton was a Game of Thrones character, who would she be? 
Daenerys ("Dany") Targaryen —
Like Dany — a dispossessed princess who believes she's the true heir to the throne of Westeros — Hillary Clinton is the dynasty candidate, who no doubt believes she was denied what was rightfully hers when the Democratic nomination slipped away in 2008. Like Dany, Hillary first gained status through marriage and managed to use a dubious marriage to build her own power base. Before returning to take the throne, both Dany (who will presumably return) and Hillary spent time in faraway lands seeking donations from foreign rulers. Like Dany, who fights to liberate slaves, Hillary has always professed a strong commitment to social justice. (Take note: Dany will learn that social justice crusades have unintended consequences.) Hillary may not have flying, fire-breathing exotic pets — she does have David Brock, Lanny Davis and James Carville. So, how about "I will take what is mine with fire and blood" for a campaign slogan?

Cersei Lannister — 
The anti-Hillary pick. Cersei, self-made widow to the late King Robert Baratheon and mother to the recently deceased King Joffrey, is cruel, manipulative and unscrupulous; on the plus side, she's one of the most powerful people in the realm. Hillary Clinton parallels? Well, Cersei was married to a philandering man who was her ticket to power. And she's got no shortage of foes searching for evidence to link her to various scandalous misdeeds. (Note to Hillary haters: So far on the series, even though Cersei is always guilty, attacking her hasn't ended well for anyone. Note to Hillary fans: You don't want to read the books.) 
Catelyn Stark —

Like the materfamilias of the Stark clan, Hillary Clinton is an experienced elder stateswoman who seeks to unite different factions against a common enemy. Also like Lady Stark, she's made strategic blunders that may cost her dearly. Hillary's inner circle has women in many key roles, including her chief "gatekeeper" Huma Abedin; Catelyn engaged as her protector a female knight, Brienne of Tarth. Granted, Catelyn is now out of the running; but Hillary may also have a touch of Stark daughter Arya, a survivor prone to reinventing herself.
Finally, the gender flip: which male character is closest to Hillary Clinton? And the answer is:
Stannis Baratheon —
The brother of the last lawful king, Robert Baratheon, Stannis is the main "dynasty candidate" on the male side. If he had a campaign slogan, it would surely be "the one true king of Westeros." Stannis strongly believes in his own inevitability — the one word most commonly bandied about with regard to Hillary Clinton.
And here's an eyebrow-raising parallel: Stannis has as his shadow adviser a witch named Melisandre who claims to communicate with higher powers; Hillary (according to Bob Woodward's 1996 book, The Choice: How Bill Clinton Won) once had an adviser named Jean Houston, a "mind research" guru who delved into psychic phenomena and guided Hillary to have chats with Eleanor Roosevelt and Mahatma Gandhi. 
Cathy Young writes a weekly column for RealClearPolitics and is also a contributing editor at Reason magazine. Follow her on Twitter at @CathyYoung63.
 To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1ynAYPT
