New use of force rules proposed for Chicago cops
CHICAGO—The nation’s second biggest police department on Friday formally proposed new rules on when officers can use deadly force, the latest move by an embattled department under Justice Department investigation to bolster public trust.
Among the changes in policy are new requirements that officers see an immediate threat before they shoot at a fleeing suspect. The policy changes also call for limiting Taser discharges to three during an incident and emphasizing that officers should try to use time and distance to their advantage before using deadly force. Current guidelines allow officers to shoot a fleeing suspect that an officer simply deems a threat.
Chicago Police Superintendent Eddie Johnson said the draft policy is meant to put a “heavy emphasis on the sanctity of life.”
The public, police officers and union officials now have a 45-day-period to offer comment on the policy changes, which are among the most significant introduced by Mayor Rahm Emanuel’s administration in the aftermath of the civil rights investigation launched late last year.
Johnson said department brass—with the help of legal staff—will review the feedback before he issues his final policy recommendations by the end of the year. He added that the policy won’t go into effect until the entire 12,500-member force is trained.
“You are witnessing transparency in action,” said Chief Anne Kirkpatrick, who heads the department’s bureau of professional standards.
Emanuel has faced pressure to overhaul the department and tighten rules governing police conduct following the release last November of video that showed a white police officer shooting a black teen 16 times.
The publication of the chilling video of Laquan McDonald’s death sparked weeks of protests in the city and led to a Justice Department probe of the police department’s practices.

Emanuel vowed to work to repair the long-frayed relationship between the city’s African-American community and police department through improving training for officers and making the department more transparent.
Earlier this week, the city council voted to replace the agency that was charged with investigating police-involved shootings and allegations of major misconduct by officers. Last month, the police department launched mandatory training for officers on de-escalating volatile situations that emphasizes using the least amount of force as possible. And earlier this year, the city made it policy to release all video of police-involved shootings within 60 to 90 days of an incident.
The new use of force policy comes as Chicago is in the midst of one of the most violent years the city has seen in more than a decade.

Chicago has already recorded 536 murders and more than 3,200 shootings, according to police department data. The city has tallied more murders than New York City and Los Angeles combined.
A police department spokesman said Chicago's police union leadership was briefed on the proposed changes on Thursday. Union officials did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
Follow USA TODAY Chicago correspondent Aamer Madhani on Twitter: @AamerISmad
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2eaixt6
