Chicago Amtrak officer charged with murder in train station shooting
CHICAGO — An Amtrak police officer has been charged with first-degree murder in connection with the fatal killing of a Minneapolis man who apparently had gone into a Chicago train station to get warm during a stopover on a bus trip.
Amtrak officer Laroyce Tankson, 31, who had been on administrative leave since the Feb. 8 shooting, turned himself in late Thursday after a warrant was issued, police said.
The victim, Chad Robertson, died in a hospital on Wednesday. The Cook County Medical Examiner's Office said he succumbed to a gunshot wound of the back. A court document said Robertson was hit in the left back shoulder by a single bullet that lodged in his neck.
The construction worker was in Chicago on a brief stopover while traveling by bus from Memphis, Tenn., to Minneapolis. In a court filing, Cook county prosecutors said the shooting occurred after a bus driver dropped off Robertson and two friends at Union Station to stay warm while awaiting their onward bus.
At one point, prosecutors said, the three went outside to smoke marijuana on the sidewalk and were confronted by Tankson and a fellow Amtrak officer, who told them to put out the cigarettes.
"Robertson apologized to the officers and told (Tankson) that he was not from Chicago," prosecutors said. The officer warned the three not to smoke marijuana in public and let them go.
Later, after leaving a nearby restaurant, the three came back to the station to retrieve luggage and were again confronted by the two Amtrak officers.
Although, prosecutors said, the officers did not suspect the three of any criminal offense other than possession of cannabis, they detained them and ordered them to stand against a nearby glass wall.
As the officers began to pat them down, Robertson bolted. Prosecutors said four people saw the incident and that "none of the witnesses saw Robertson with a weapon nor did they see him gesture or turn toward the officers."
As Robertson fled, prosecutors said, Tankson crouched and fired his pistol, hitting the victim once. Robertson "immediately fell face first to the ground and remained on the ground motionless," prosecutors said. "No weapon of any kind was recovered from Robertson or in the vicinity."
Chicago attorney Douglas Hopson, who represented the Robertson family, told the the Minneapolis Star-Tribune that the officer had yelled "'If you don't stop running, I'm going to shoot you,' and Chad kept running."
Hopson said Robertson, the father of two young children, had no criminal record, and was unarmed but was carrying "an insignificant amount" of marijuana.
He said the family was considering filing a wrongful death lawsuit against the officers.
,
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2m4pKL6
