How 5 recent music movies fare
Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this report didn’t fully characterize Buzz Osborne’s relationship with Kurt Cobain. The musician went to high school with Cobain and played in his pre-Nirvana band Fecal Matter. 
Straight Outta Compton, the N.W.A. biopic out Friday, is the latest movie to chart the milestones and pitfalls of some of music's most indelible figures — but not every film gets it right. USA TODAY examines how five biopics and documentaries stack up against the history books:
STRAIGHT OUTTA COMPTON
Fact: More than a decade in development, the rise (and split) of West Coast hip-hop group N.W.A. finally came to the big screen with the help of real-life members Ice Cube and Dr. Dre, as well as Tomica Woods-Wright (wife of the late Eazy-E and also a producer on the film). With their input, the decade-spanning drama accurately covers many of the career highs and lows, including the FBI's warning to N.W.A. about "advocating violence" with F--- Tha Police; Eazy's contentious rivalry with Suge Knight and his Death Row Records; and Dre and Cube saying they made amends with Eazy before his death in 1995 of AIDS-related complications.
Fiction: In Compton, Ice Cube quits N.W.A. after contract disagreements with manager Jerry Heller, but Heller claimed that Cube was voted out of the group, according to The Daily Beast. And in his 2007 memoir, Ruthless, Heller described how Eazy eagerly sought him out as manager, while in the movie, Heller approaches him first. More troubling is the way the film eliminates the brutal attack of MTV personality Dee Barnes at an industry party in 1991, which landed her in the emergency room and was later settled out of court.

AMY 
Fact: Filmmaker Asif Kapadia relies on audio interviews and pre-existing video to piece together the story of late singer Amy Winehouse, who died of alcohol poisoning in 2011 at age 27. Drawn from 3,000 hours of footage and more than 100 interviews with friends and collaborators, Kapadia told USA TODAY that the material backed up Winehouse's tragic narrative: which included struggles with substance abuse and bulimia, as well as numerous legal scrapes with husband Blake Fielder-Civil. "Do we deal with this truth that keeps coming up or do we not do it?" he asked.
Fiction: Although many members of Winehouse's inner circle initially cooperated with Amy, some have since disassociated themselves from it, including her father, Mitch Winehouse. A previously released statement his publicist sent to USA TODAY says the movie "is both misleading and contains some basic untruths." He also told The Guardian in May that "they are trying to portray me in the worst possible light." He announced on British talk show Loose Women that he'll make an "alternative film" with director Reg Traviss, Winehouse's boyfriend at the time of her death, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

LOVE & MERCY
Fact: In writing the Beach Boys biopic — which tells the dual stories of a young (Paul Dano) and middle-aged (John Cusack) Brian Wilson — co-screenwriter Oren Moverman consulted directly with the legendary musician and his wife, Melinda, according to Slate. "The goal of the film was to be honest," Melinda told USA TODAY, and touches on key moments in Brian's life, such as his perfectionism in the studio while making Pet Sounds to his drug-addled, bedridden depression in the mid-1970s to how he met his wife (Elizabeth Banks), a former model and car saleswoman.
Fiction: The film seems to most deviate from truth in how Brian was saved from his domineering psychotherapist, Eugene Landy (Paul Giamatti), who kept him heavily medicated and shut off from others. Toward the end of Love & Mercy, Melinda and Brian's housekeeper bring a 1989 will to his father, listing Landy as his main beneficiary. In actuality, it may have been a Beach Boys fan who flagged Brian's unhealthy physical appearance to Carl and biographer David Leaf at a 1990 fan convention, Slate says. Similarly, Moverman told Collider that conversations about Brian's brother's death and his first wife's Matzo ball soup may not have occurred, but were instead reflective of what was going through his mind at the time.

KURT COBAIN: MONTAGE OF HECK 
Fact: Tracing the life of the Nirvana frontman from his childhood until his suicide at age 27, the heavily stylized documentary is "as close to the truth as anybody's ever going to get," his widow, Courtney Love, told the Tribeca Film Festival crowd back in April. That's because most of the film is told through Cobain's own words, using recently unearthed home movies, recordings, journal entries and drawings that director Brett Morgen found in the family's archives.
Fiction: Although most haven't questioned the authenticity of what's seen in Montage of Heck, The Melvins' Buzz Osborne asserts that "90% ... is (false)," in an op-ed for The Talkhouse. Osborne, who went to high school with Cobain and played in Cobain’s pre-Nirvana band Fecal Matter, writes that there wasn’t an "inkling of truth" to the All Apologies singer's alleged stomach problems, suicide attempt as a teen and sexual encounter with a special-needs girl, all of which are included in the documentary. Perhaps tellingly, Love told the Tribeca audience that some stories may have been embellished by Kurt himself. "We would do the (Charles) Dickens thing," she said. "We would compete about who had the worse childhood."

EDEN
Fact:The vibrant French-language drama tracks the evolution of the dance music scene throughout the 1990s and 2000s, with a soundtrack of more than a few dozen songs by artists such as Bootsy Collins, Jaydee, Crystal Waters and, most notably, Daft Punk. The incognito DJ duo gave their blessing to be featured as minor characters throughout the film and actually provided input for the script, co-writer Sven Hansen-Love told USA TODAY.
Fiction:The Parisian protagonist, Paul (Félix de Givry), is a semi-autobiographical character based in part on Sven's experiences coming up in the "French touch" music scene and the memories of his younger sister, Eden director Mia Hansen-Love. Although in real life, Sven quit DJing in 2010, Paul doesn't stop until 2013 — a decision made solely so they could include Daft Punk's Within (off Grammy 2013 album of the year Random Access Memories) in the film.
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1TrqF70
