Kurt Angle returns to WWE for Hall of Fame induction
UP NEXT

 USA TODAY 
 UP NEXT 
ORLANDO – Kurt Angle urged WWE performers to take chances with their characters — and then reviewed many of his more well-known comedic turns — Friday night as he was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame in his first appearance with the company in 11 years.
Angle, a 1996 Olympic gold medalist, was greeted with, “Welcome Back” chants after he introduced by John Cena.
“The moment that we are all about to experience is overdue,” Cena said. “There aren’t any words to describe how great this next individual is. … His accomplishments are of mythical proportions.”

 © Provided by USA Today Angle, 48, was a four-time WWE champion during seven years with WWE before he asked for his release in 2006. He spent the next 10 years with Total Nonstop Action, winning its world title six times.
Along the way, though, Angle struggled with substance abuse and other personal issues. He has been clean for three years.
“I’ve done a lot of things in my life, some good and some bad,” he said. 
Turning to the WWE performers in the audience, he continued, "I want to tell these guys and girls to limit your mistakes. Know what you’re allowed to do and what you’re not. You’re going to make mistakes big and small. Follow the protocol. Follow the rules. Use common sense. Don’t be the guy or the girl who says he could have been the greatest of all-time if he would he just stayed out of trouble. I know how that feels.”
He then talked about being willing to take chances — not in the ring but in stretching your personality. “The character moments last forever, trust me.” He used some of his all-time most popular to make the point — the little cowboy hat; the wig with wrestling headgear he wore after his head was shaved in a match; singing from his battle rap segment with Cena; and then a rendition of “I’m a Sexy Kurt,” his parody of Shawn Michaels’ theme music.
“Sometimes you can make fun of yourself and it turns out in your favor,” Angle said.
He also thanked his wife and five children, his parents and siblings and many of the performers whom he worked with during his WWE career.
He closed by saying, “I’m going to celebrate this Hall of Fame induction the only way I know how.” He then took two jugs of milk and poured them toward his mouth, with most landing on his tuxedo.
Where the relationship between Angle and WWE goes beyond Friday night remains uncertain. He will appear at Sunday’s WrestleMania with the Hall of Fame class and is expected to be part of RAW on Monday. Angle has expressed interest in wrestling.
Angle capped a night of emotional moments that began with Diamond Dallas Page, considered to be wrestling’s greatest overachiever after starting his career at age 35. “To be an overachiever, you have to first be an over-believer,” he said.
Page told stories about his late mentor, the American Dream “Dusty Rhodes,” using Rhodes’ trademark speaking voice in the retelling. He said that Rhodes was often patient with him as Page bemoaned his struggles to get ahead, but he said Rhodes snapped at him once for saying that he would never be world champion. It turned out to be a pivotal moment. 
“Then what the hell are you doing this for,” Rhodes told him, Page said. “If you don’t believe that you have the ability to be the world champion, you should get out of this business right now.”
Page had a pad nearby and wrote down, “I will be the world champion in five years.” He won his first world title four years, four month and 14 days later. “Don’t think it, ink it,” said Page, three-time WCW world champion. “Own it.”
Other highlights from the night include:
• The Rock ‘n’ Roll Express was inducted by Jim Cornette, in a highly anticipated introductory speech considering Cornette’s acrimonious relationship with the company. Cornette was on his best behaviour as he brought out Ricky Morton and Robert Gibson, the 1980s and early 1990s tag team that still wrestles on the independent circuit. The team has been together for 34 years. In an emotional moment that had tears on both men’s faces, Morton ended by telling his partner, “You are the greatest person I’ve ever met. … I have four brothers back home, but in my heart, I have five.”
• “Ravishing” Rick Rude, who died in 1999 at age 40, was inducted by Ricky “The Dragon” Steamboat. He noted Rude’s sculpted physique and strength and said, “they broke the mold with that guy.” Rude’s family accepted the honour, with his son making a speech on behalf of the family. Saying he was unsure how to handle his remarks, he thought of what his dad would say. Breaking into Rude’s trademark phrase, he said, “What I’m going to need right now is for all of you fat, out of shape, overweight Central Florida sweathogs to keep the noise down so all the ladies can get what they came for tonight.” The line got a standing ovation. He then turned to Rude the family man rather than the in-ring performer.
• Four-time women’s champion Beth Phoenix, who dominated with a physical style that was atypical of her era, spoke eloquently of her desire to get into wrestling from a young age. “They say you never forget your first love,” she said. “I know that’s true because wrestling is my first love.” She also lauded the current women’s roster for “continuing the movement for equality of women in entertainment. … We’ve come a long way in … pushing the boundaries of conventional beliefs. The future is so bright.”
• Teddy Long has had virtually every job in wrestling from driving the truck with the ring to referee to manager of tag team champions to longest-running Smackdown general manager. He recounted how he was told about 30 minutes before airtime that he would be the GM that night. “I couldn’t let the WWE down. I couldn’t let the McMahon family down. They were giving me an opportunity and I had to make this thing work,” he said. “Ladies and gentlemen, I ain’t blowing my own horn, but I made it work.”
• Seven legacy selections also were inducted representing the pre-modern era of pro wrestling: Dr. Jerry Graham, Haystacks Calhoun, Luther Lindsay, Rikidozan, June Byers, Judy Grable, Farmer Burns and Toots Mondt.
• Former Rutgers football player Eric LeGrand was named the winner of the Warrior Award.
