2012 Election: Presidential, Senate, and State
More top stories in Politics

   POLITICS: Jackson's absence testing patience in Chicago
 Election Day is five weeks away, and Rep. Jesse Jackson Jr. remains out of sight.
 

   ON POLITICS: On Politics gets restyled for new website
 USA TODAY's politics blog gets restyled as part of a redesign for the newspaper, website and mobile apps.
 

   ON POLITICS: Rooting for Nationals is bipartisan affair
 Baseball brings together the likes of Democrat Harry Reid and Republican Mitch McConnell.
 

   ON POLITICS: Polls: Obama leads in N.H.; race tight in Nev., N.C.
 New Hampshire voters have improved views about the direction of the country.
 

   THE OVAL: Obama's day: Still raising money
 Good morning from The Oval, on another day of fundraising for President Obama.
 

   NATION: Crime not on presidential contest radar
 With recent mass shootings, crime has all but vanished from public discussion this presidential campaign season.
 

   THE OVAL: Obama, Romney aides lower expectations for first debate
 Both Romney and Obama camps say the other is the favorite for next week's debate.
 

   WEATHER: Weather Channel heads to swing states for election
 The network will send some meteorologists out on Election Day to monitor the weather's impact.
 

   ON POLITICS: Billionaire donates $1M to Obama super PAC
 George Soros has been a major contributor to liberal causes and Democratic groups.
 

   ON POLITICS: Akin says McCaskill more 'ladylike' in 2006
 The Missouri Senate GOP nominee has apologized for comments about 'legitimate rape.'
 

   ON POLITICS: Iowans start casting votes for president
 About one-third of all Iowa votes in 2008 were cast during the early voting period.
 

   THE OVAL: Obama calls for a 'new economic patriotism'
 As Mitt Romney cited gloomy new economic statistics, President Obama touted a "new economic patriotism."
 

   ON POLITICS: In Virginia, Romney hits Obama on military cuts
 Mitt Romney warns that defense budget cuts will weaken U.S. security.
 

   POLITICS: Romney's Ohio backers don't believe the polls
 The polls may show him dropping in Ohio, but Mitt Romney's Buckeye State supporters aren't buying it.
 

   ON POLITICS: Conservative PAC backs Todd Akin in Missouri
 The Senate Conservatives Fund joins the list of high-profile endorsements for the GOP congressman.
 

   THE OVAL: Obama near 270 electoral votes?
 There are signs that President Obama is close to an Electoral College majority.
 
   ON POLITICS: Poll: Booker holds major support in N.J. special election
 The winner of the October 16 special election will take the seat held by Democratic Sen. Frank Lautenberg until his death in June.
 
   ON DEADLINE: 10 Fla. counties report suspicious GOP voter sign-ups
 At least 10 Florida counties have identified possibly fraudulent Republican voter registration forms, official said.
