Trump demands Palestinian 'respect' to receive U.S. aid
CLOSE

 President Donald Trump says the United States Embassy's move to Jerusalem is happening "ahead of schedule," as he sits down with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. (Jan. 25) AP

DAVOS, Switzerland — President Trump said Thursday he has a “proposal” for Mideast peace, but won't push for talks until Palestinians show “respect” for his decision to move the U.S. Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. 
During a meeting at the World Economic Forum with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Trump also threatened to withhold U.S. aid to the Palestinians “unless they sit down and negotiate peace” with Israel. 
Trump, who address the business and political leaders on Friday, inflamed the Palestinians and drew condemnations from most other world leaders for his controversial decision to relocate the U.S. Embassy from Tel Aviv. 
There has been a longstanding international consensus that the future of Jerusalem, which both Israel and Palestinians claim as their capital, should be decided by negotiations on creating two independent nations living side-by-side. 
Peace talks however have been stalled for years because of Israeli anger over unrelenting attacks by Palestinians and Palestinian fury over Israel's often violent control of the West Bank. 
Trump said Thursday that Palestinians disrespected the U.S. by refusing to meet with Vice President Pence during his recent trip to the Middle East. Palestinian Authority leader Mahmoud Abbas blamed Trump's Jerusalem decision for the snub.
Trump did not offer any details of his peace proposal. His son-in-law and Mideast negotiator, Jared Kushner, has been trying to restart the dormant negotiations without apparent success.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 Emmanuel Macron, President of France, center, is surrounded by listeners after a special address as part of the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, Jan. 24, 2018. Markus Schreiber, AP
 Zimbabwe's President Emmerson Mnangagwa attends the annual World Economic Forum (WEF) on Jan. 24, 2018 in Davos, Switzerland. Zimbabwe's new president, Emmerson Mnangagwa, said that the country would go to the polls before July, in the first elections since Robert Mugabe was ousted after 37 years in power. Fabrice Coffrini, AFP/Getty Images
 IMF Director Christine Lagarde (C) reacts after kicking a football with the UN sustainability goals given her by the Norwegian Prime Minister Erna Solberg (R), during their meeting at the World Economic Forum (WEF) annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland on Jan. 23, 2018. Spectators are General Secretary of the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), Sharan Burrow (L), social activist Chetna Sinha (2-L) and Director of CERN, Fabiola Gianotti (2-R). The Norwegian Prime Minister is one of 17 eminent persons assisting the UN Secretary-General in the campaign to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that world leaders unanimously adopted in September 2015. The football with the SDGs has become one of her government's most beloved gimmicks. Heiko Junge, EPA-EFE
 Armed Swiss police officers stand guard on the roof of a hotel near the congress center where the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum takes place in Davos, Switzerland, Jan. 23, 2018. The meeting brings together enterpreneurs, scientists, chief executive and political leaders in Davos from Jan. 23 to 26. Markus Schreiber, AP
