Muslim college women find acceptance and 'love' with hijab celebrations
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story included an erroneous reference to the location of Fairfield University. It is located in Connecticut.
Muslim students across America have been passing out headscarves, buttons and information sheets to their non-Muslim peers to promote understanding — in defiance of fears that their activism could invite hostility or harassment.
While World Hijab Day is officially celebrated on February 1, many Muslim student groups chose to celebrate it later in February or in early March.
The aim, as numerous students told USA TODAY College, is to raise awareness of Muslim culture and bolster solidarity.
Marya Ayloush, a junior at UCLA and member of her school’s Muslim Student Association, was the primary organizer of Hijab Day at UCLA. She said she was motivated to organize the event because she wanted to give students an opportunity to “stand in solidarity” with their Muslim peers.
“It’s no doubt that Muslim women are the most targeted among Muslims because we are outwardly representing the religion,” Ayloush told USA TODAY College. “Unless we are able to educate people about it, and give the an opportunity to stand in solidarity, then we’re on our own.”

Marya Ayloush. (Photo: Cehara Omar)
She expressed concerns over the lack of representation of Muslims. Much Islamophobia happens, she said, because “because just don’t know” what Islam is, not because they’re bad people.
“It’s not ill-will,” said Ayloush. “Many people think Islam is a religion of violence. But when you actually change their mind, they’re so happy. We know that most people are open-minded, accepting, tolerant.”
Changing people’s minds about Islam was one of the motivating forces for this event, Ayloush said. 
During Hijab Day at UCLA, Ayloush and her team of 20 volunteers wrapped headscarves onto their fellow peers. “All 200 scarves flew out in less than two hours,” she said.

The Hijab Day booth at UCLA. (Photo: Marya Ayloush)
Further, she didn’t want to leave men out, she said, so they received solidarity pins. “Right now, we’re taking all the allies we can get,” she said. “We wanted to include brothers in this too.”

The solidarity pins at UCLA’s 2017 Hijab Day. (Photo: Marya Ayloush)
Mona Fouladi, a senior psychobiology major at UCLA, told USA TODAY College she really enjoyed the Hijab Day Ayloush organized. Born into a Muslim family, Fouladi didn’t wear the hijab until she turned 17. It was her own choice, she said.
“Hijab day was one of my happiest days as a UCLA student,” said Fouladi. “To be able to share my religion and be honest about my love for both hijab and Islam as a whole was truly a relief.”
While Fouladi believes that “life for Muslims is certainly getting worse under Trump’s administration,” and she has experienced a rise in “bigoted comments,” she says there’s a silver lining to it all.
Notwithstanding the uptick in harassment Muslims have faced, support from her peers and fellow Americans has surged in recent months. “The solidarity from my fellow Americans in response to the Muslim ban was amazing. As an American-Iranian, I really hope that this support will continue,” she said.
Danya Mohammed, a Palestinian Muslim and senior at the University of California-Riverside, told USA TODAY College that as the organizer of Hijab Day at her school, at first she feared backlash. Before Hijab Day, she was very worried that her peers would be “too afraid” to wear the hijab for a day due to current events.

Hijab Day at UC-Riverside. (Photo: Yasmeen Dabbas)
But those concerns, and the “current political climate that we are living in,” also motivated her, she said, adding that she wanted to “prove otherwise” the claims that Muslim people don’t belong in America.
Mohammed’s fears were dashed as soon as she and her friends started passing out hijabs on campus, ultimately handing out 170 of them. “We were pleasantly surprised to see the outpour in solidarity,” said Mohammed. “We are blessed.”

Hijab Day at UC-Riverside. (Photo: George Elias)
Hijab Day has been celebrated by numerous other colleges across America, including the University of New Mexico, Simpson College in Iowa, Fairfield University in Connecticut, and California State-Long Beach.
Hager Rawag, a senior at California State-Long Beach who helped organize her school’s event, told USA TODAY College that she was hopeful and optimistic for the future, especially as over 150 women participated in Hijab Day at her school.
“Hijab Day is a great way to teach people about Muslim women and who we really are,” said Rawag, noting that the educational aspect of the event is paramount. Educating people, she said, “creates a domino effect of love and tolerance for each other.” 
“Especially in this political climate it is important to educate the public on Muslim women and why they wear hijab,” she said.
During Hijab Day, many of Rawag’s peers asked her if Muslim women are oppressed. “No,” she told them. “Hijab is very liberating, and it is our choice to wear it.”
Rawag says that she “will always wear the hijab,” and that she’s proud of being Muslim, despite the potential for pushback and judgment from other people. “I am a strong believer of what the hijab stands for: empowerment, women’s rights and acceptance.” 
Toni Airaksinen is a student at Barnard College and a USA TODAY College correspondent.
