America's annual beer festivals
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 Denver's Great American Beer Festival is the country's largest and most prominent brewing celebrations and competitions. Ryan Dearth
 On day one, brewmasters are typically paired with gourmet chefs competing in a people’s choice award for best food and beer pairing. The main festival on day two, or Craft Beer Heaven, has more than 85 craft beers on tap for sampling, food trucks and live music. California Beer Festival
 The event has around 80 breweries and more than 300 rare, single releases and special barrel beers to sample, along with a food truck rally and local artisan food vendors. The festival is also part concert, as three local and regional bands fill the outdoor Food and Music Pavilion throughout the day. Tyler Malone, The Second Shooter
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay

Last SlideNext Slide

CONNECTTWEET 2 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Beer festival season falls heavy in late spring and throughout the summer each year, and the country's annual craft brewing celebrations never go out of style — especially as the trend continues to boom. Most beer festivals around the country have expanded to include globally sourced brews, local music acts, artisan vendors, crafty activities, home brewing competitions and lots of barbecue. It’s hard to find a beer fest without a food truck line or a waterfront view, though some use creative venues like zoos, museums and stadiums.
We've rounded up a nationwide beer festival tour so you can choose from some of America’s most popular, reoccurring and annually anticipated events to pencil in any year. Browse the gallery above for travel-worthy beer weekends, from Asheville's Beer City Festival in May to Denver's Great American Beer Festival in June, and beyond.
Get a sneak peek at the Great American Beer Festival from a previous year below.
CLOSE

 Host Carri Wilbanks asks beer lovers and brewers what's trending in the national brewing scene at the annual Great American Beer Festival. Jason Bunch
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/27eMV8A
