Roy Halladay: Family 'heartbroken' after his death, to hold public memorial Tuesday in Florida
CLOSE

 Former Major League Baseball pitcher Roy Halladay died when a plane he was flying crashed into water in the Gulf of Mexico. Halladay was certified and licensed to be a pilot last November. USA TODAY Sports

Roy Halladay’s family said they were “heartbroken” and enduring a “time of overwhelming grief” in their first public comments since the former All-Star pitcher died when the plane he was piloting crashed into the Gulf of Mexico near their home on Florida’s west coast.
In a statement released Thursday by Major League Baseball and attributed to the Halladay family, Brandy and teenage sons Braden and Ryan said Halladay, 40, was “selfless in every aspect of his life” and devoted to mastering aviation in the same manner he once dominated major league hitters.
A public memorial will be held at 4 p.m. Tuesday at Spectrum Field in Clearwater, Fla.
Halladay was a 203-game winner for the Toronto Blue Jays and Philadelphia Phillies, two-time Cy Young Award winner and eight-time All-Star who retired after the 2013 season. He received his pilot’s license in 2016, inspired largely by his father, Roy, who was a corporate pilot.
MORE ON HALLADAY
Halladay’s ICON A5 plane crashed Tuesday in the gulf waters off Pasco County; he was the lone passenger. The National Transportation Safety Board said at a Wednesday news conference that it could take more than a year to complete an investigation into the crash.
Halladay and Brandy appeared in a promotional video for ICON, during which Brandy expressed her reservations about Halladay flying.
“Roy grew up with a passion for planes and always had the goal of becoming a pilot,” the family said in its statement Thursday. “Since retiring from baseball, he has been actively studying, accumulating the required flight hours and obtaining multiple pilot certifications and licenses. Just as he was known for his work ethic in baseball, he was also widely respected by those who knew him in the aviation community for his hard work, attention to detail and dedication to safety while flying. He treated his passion for aviation with the same joy and enthusiasm as he did his love for baseball.”
Tuesday’s memorial will be held at the Phillies’ spring training home, in the community where he was lauded for his devotion to his family and the youth baseball teams in the area he helped coach.
"While we mourn the loss of the core of our family, we choose to celebrate him and remember the man we knew privately on and off the field,” the family said. “We hope that he serves as an example of professionalism, integrity and hard work for all who knew him.
“For us, we will forever remember his unconditional love, humility and the sacrifices he made to provide for the family that meant the world to him. On behalf of our family we thank you for respecting our privacy during this time of overwhelming grief.”
Corrected statement from Halladay family (with correct date): pic.twitter.com/uxeed5cqBc
— Mark Feinsand (@Feinsand) November 9, 2017
Gallery: Remembering Roy Halladay
