With title window closing, Clippers fine-tuning game at quarter mark
LOS ANGELES – Doc Rivers doesn’t care how close the contests are, how physical they may be or how poorly the defense may play.
At the first-quarter mark of the marathon NBA season, he wants his Los Angeles Clippers to grind out wins, period.
They did just that Monday, eking out a 121-120 victory over the pesky Portland Trail Blazers in a testy battle that produced plenty of physical evidence.
Blake Griffin experienced difficulty speaking with a few fresh stitches knitted into his lip after Mason Plumlee’s right elbow drilled him during another foul the NBA deemed “an unnatural act.”
Raymond Felton limped out of the media room and commented on how much he ached after logging almost 24 minutes following a two-game absence.
It was Felton’s ball pressure on defense that Rivers credited with the win, and this deep Clippers team (18-7, No. 3 in Western Conference) needs performances like that from role players if it wants to climb over the hump.
Just last week, the Golden State Warriors pounded the Clippers into submission. That followed disappointing losses to the Indiana Pacers and Brooklyn Nets, but also a victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers.
The talent-laden squad’s window to win its first NBA title in team history is closing fast, with star players Chris Paul and Griffin free to leave after the season. If the players know it – and they must – they aren’t admitting it.
“No pressure on us,” said Paul, who scored 21 points with 14 assists. “I think for us it’s about the process. Competing at a high level every night and building – building. We expect a lot out of ourselves.
“ … We understand how we started the season. We’ve been down, and now we’re trying to pick it back up.”
Gallery: NBA photo of the day

 April 11: Atlanta Hawks forward Ersan Ilyasova (7) reaches for a loose ball past Charlotte Hornets forward Michael Kidd-Gilchrist (14) in the second quarter at Philips Arena. Brett Davis-USA TODAY Sports
Last SlideNext Slide
The Clippers feature three max players in Paul, Griffin and center DeAndre Jordan, a recipe for winning in today’s superstar driven NBA. With an elite point guard, power forward and center, plus lights-out shooters in JJ Redick and Jamal Crawford, L.A.’s other NBA squad is a true contender.
It’s not enough to simply contend, though. They must prove they can hang with powerhouses like the Warriors, who boast shooters for days and a small-ball game that’s tough to keep pace with.
The defense must tighten up. Blazers guards Damian Lillard and CJ McCollum easily found high-percentage shots at the top of the key. Rivers says he’ll live with the open twos, but isn’t pleased with the slow-to-react transition defense.
“I think that’s where we slipped the most, and then our on-ball and weak-side defense,” Rivers expressed. “We had a stretch where we were getting steals and getting our hands on the ball. Our deflections have been way down. Those are areas we are going to focus on.”
Griffin felt the Clippers were the aggressor Monday, and it was a heated game. He tussled with Plumlee countless times. Jordan and Blazers swingman Evan Turner were both ejected late.
Griffin wants the team to have “better intensity defensively,” night in and night out. If the Clippers can assert themselves physically when it counts, it could be the difference.
“Just because we’ve had a couple of games that were good, doesn’t mean we’re good,” said Griffin, who posted 26 points and 12 rebounds in his return from a one-game absence. “We still have to keep working, keep improving. We’ve got to keep being better.”
Follow Mike Coppinger on Twitter @MikeCoppinger
