New in Miami: Hotels as hot as its beaches
CLOSE

 Fontainebleau Miami Beach has its own boat which goes out every day to catch fresh fish for the hotel's on-site restaurants. USA TODAY Travel's Nancy Trejos takes a tour of "Water World" where the catch is stored. Carina Belmonte

MIAMI—Miami's hotel scene is just as hot as its beaches.
This year, the city had major boutique and lifestyle hotel openings including the Thompson Miami Beach, Metropolitan COMO, and Ian Schrager's highly-anticipated EDITION, designed in partnership with Marriott.
Many other hotels are expected to open in the next two years, including the luxury Faena Hotel, SLS lux Hotel, a Yotel, and InterContinental Hotel Group's Hotel Indigo.
Marriott also has grand plans for an AC Hotel, the brand it recently imported from Europe to appeal to younger travels. (The first AC Hotel opened in New Orleans in December.)
While South Beach always gets most of the attention, many hotel developers are betting on other parts of the city, including Midbeach, the area north of 23rd Street that has up until now been mostly residential. Most travelers would only go to that part of the beach to hit the hip club and restaurants at the Fontainebleau.
The Downtown/Brickell area is also now a booming area, with several large real estate and retail developments in the works.
"Downtown Miami is emerging as a high-energy place to live, shop and work," said David Arditi, principal of Aria Development Group, which is building the Yotel, set to open in 2017. "There is strong demand for urban-chic residential apartments, and Miami's appeal as an international destination is at an all-time high."
USA TODAY took a tour of a few of the new properties. Here's what we found.

 The pool at the new Redbury Hotel in South Beach. Skott Snider
Thompson Miami Beach
Walk into the new Thompson Miami Beach in Midbeach, and you know you're in Miami—albeit Miami in the 1950s.
The Art Deco building is decorated in bright colors. The 380 rooms have yellow-patterned carpets and accented pillows. Furniture has rounded edges rather than square corners. The two pools have yellow and orange cabanas.
The Crown Room, the second-floor lounge, serves classic cocktails in a dark setting that looks like it could be the setting for a "Mad Men" scene.
Outside by the pool is another bar called the 1930s House. It is actually a house from the 1930s that was moved to this spot.
"It's really reminiscent of the '50s and '60s, of what Florida and design and construction were back then," says General Manager Brett Orlando.
Orlando says the hotel is trying to appeal to both tourists and locals. That's why the valet parking fee is just $5—almost unheard of in Miami.
Local celebrity chef Michelle Bernstein was in charge of creating the food and beverage concept. She came up with Seagrape, named after an indigenous Florida fruit that she recalls pointing out to her mom when she was a child on the beach.
"It was that a-ha moment that reminded me of the past and of my future at the hotel," she says.
Bernstein is incorporating some of the dishes she was known for at her wildly successful Michy's restaurant, which she plans to re-open, with those that the hotel's chefs have created.
"We really married everything together to create a menu that is approachable," she says.
The ingredients are local. She scours Miami's farmers' markets for fresh produce. The fish is caught by former classmates turned fishermen.
She's also trying to lighten up the dishes. The menu emphasizes fish, but even heartier meals, such as short ribs, come in a sauce that is not too heavy. Don't expect to see too many starches on your plate.
"You can feel sated without feeling gross," she says. "We wanted to appeal to the palate of the people down here as well as all the people who are visiting."
Info: Thompsonhotels.com/hotels/thompson-miami-beach
Starting rate: $359/night

EDITION
Ian Schrager is often credited with creating the boutique hotel concept.
Many industry insiders were surprised when he teamed up with Marriott, a hotel giant that hasn't always been known for thinking outside of the box.
Their partnership has resulted in EDITION hotels in Istanbul and London.
With EDITION Miami Beach, which opened in early December in Midbeach, Schrager has created a hotel where one can sleep, eat, work, and play in over-the-top fashion.
The hotel has what Schrager calls "a sort of red-light district, but legal for the wild at heart."
A micro-club—a modern-day version of Schrager's legendary Studio 54 in New York City—has soundstage-quality sound and lighting systems created by Patrick Woodroffe, who has curated concerts for Lady Gaga and Beyonce.
"This picks up where Studio left off," Schrager says. "A visual riot, sensory overload, a truly serious dance club."
There's also a bowling alley with luminescent bowling balls and an indoor ice-skating rink.
An outdoor resort area is named Tropicale, in honor of the Tropicana, the historic 1950s Havana nightclub. At night it turns into an outdoor nightclub. There's a Terrace Bar overlooking the pool area and a private beach with an outdoor movie screen, a fire pit and private bungalows.
One reminder that EDITION is a Marriott hotel is the Hot Shoppe, an homage to the original A&W root beer stand that the Marriott family started in 1927.
Michelin star chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten is in charge of the food and beverage venues, which include the Market, a reinvention of the 24-hour coffee shop. Schrager bills it as part patisserie, part boulangerie and part salumeria. It offers casual gourmet fast food and dining in an open air café.
"It's a place that can be your first stop of the day, and your last stop of the night," he says.
For a more formal dining experience, guests can go to the Matador Room, where Vongerichten is offering up a menu with Spanish, Caribbean and South American influences.
And if you ever want to sleep, the hotel has 294 rooms, which include bungalows and a penthouse.
Info: Editionhotels.com/miami-beach
Starting rate: $429
Metropolitan COMO
Another newbie in the booming Midbeach area is the Metropolitan COMO, an Asian brand.
It is much smaller and less flashy than its competitors, but its European sophistication makes it an enticing alternative.
The hotel has just 74 rooms spread out over nine floors in a pre-war Art Deco building designed in 1939 by American architect Albert Anis.
Rooms are minimalist with beds covered in white linens, pastel-colored walls and terrazzo floors rather than carpeting.

"We are the anti-Miami hotel," says sales director Thibaut Asso. "I feel like I'm going back in time."
The restaurant, Traymore, is filled with seafood and local ingredients. The Traymore Bar is billed as Miami Beach's first Gin Club with monthly events and tastings.
COMO hotels have a focus on wellnesss, so you can also get healthy juices either at the restaurant or the pool bar.
The Shambhala Urban Escape spa features Asian-based therapies and a rooftop hydrotherapy pool.
Info: Comohotels.com/metropolitanmiamibeach
Starting rate: $400
Redbury South Beach
South Beach is still a hot destination in Miami, and this relative newcomer has added to its trendiness.
The 69-room hotel is part of Sam Nazarian's SBE Entertainment empire, which includes the SLS hotels.
This chic boutique hotel is not on the beach but it is across the street from its sister property, the Raleigh, which is oceanfront. The SLS South Beach, also an oceanside sister property, is nearby.

Redbury makes up for the lack of oceanfront property with its massive rooftop deck with a pool. The roof has a lovely view of nearby Art Deco buildings.
The Redbury has whimsical rooms designed by magazine photographer and music video director Matthew Rolston. Each room has a record player with actual records to play.
While the hotel has been around for more than a year now, it is celebrating the opening of its new restaurant Cleo.
It's the third Cleo in the SBE family. Run by chef Danny Elmaleh, it joins its Los Angeles and Las Vegas outposts.
The Mediterranean inspired menu has tapas that range from $7 to $16—inexpensive for South Beach.
Info: Theredbury.com/southbeach/
Starting rate: $297



Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1zvQZgJ
