Fear factor: 177 scholars skip academic conference over Trump travel ban
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 

Iranian student Sara Yarjani wipes her eye as she exits the Tom Bradley International Terminal at Los Angeles International Airport in Los Angeles, Feb. 5, 2017. Yarjani was detained for 23 hours during the travel ban. A federal appeals court denied the government’s request to resume the travel ban after a federal judge issued a temporary restraining order blocking enforcement of President Trump’s executive order that banned people from seven mainly Muslim countries from entering the United States. (Photo: Paul Buck, EPA)
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated the number of scholars who skipped the 2017 International Studies Association conference and the number of usual attendees at the annual event. 
The fear factor is serious.
President Trump’s Jan. 27 travel order banning travel from seven Muslim-majority countries has been halted — with his administration promising a new travel order — but the fear factor is already causing great ripples in the academic community.
And it’s affecting not just individual students, but the academic community overall: 177 scholars chose to not attend the International Studies Association (ISA) annual conference in Baltimore last week, on Feb. 22-25, all of them citing reasons related to the Trump travel ban.
Here’s the fine print: About 40 to 50 of the 177 non-attendees said they were directly impacted by Trump’s travel ban, according to Dr. Mark Boyer, executive director of ISA.
The others opted out of going to the conference for fear over being profiled, questioned, detained or even barred from entering the United States. 
 My paper in @Journal_IS won "Best Security Article" at @isanet 😀… but then, could not attend #ISA2017 because of #MuslimBan chaos. ☹️ https://t.co/s2Id6fQJ1H
 — Aisha Ahmad (@ProfAishaAhmad) February 23, 2017
And some chose to forego the conference in solidarity with those directly affected by the ban, according to Boyer.
“It is absolutely an impediment in terms of our work as academics in researching, investigating, and making the world a better place,” Boyer told USA TODAY College.
 Thanks @smsaideman & @DavidAWelch for receiving my award at #ISA2017 – here's my statement & my article: https://t.co/bV37Aqv2iQ pic.twitter.com/ORXESPK66v
 — Aisha Ahmad (@ProfAishaAhmad) February 25, 2017
Boyer, also a distinguished professor of geography at the University of Connecticut, said the travel ban threatens travel freedom and the ability of scholars to do their work.
 Baltimore attendees expressing solidarity with fellow members who could not be here #resistanceISA #ISA2017 pic.twitter.com/8rpd3EMuQV
 — ISA (@isanet) February 24, 2017
The ISA meeting is an annual global event in which 6,500 students and professors gather to discuss academia, global social sciences and research methods.
A majority of members are professors who teach at the college level, while other academic members work at NGOs and the United Nations.
“It was an incredibly positive experience, with low-level travel problems other than the 177 who didn’t attend,” Dr. Boyer commented.
There was no penalty for academics who did not attend. ISA said they would refund conference fees for those who couldn’t attend. The lack of penalty ensures that the no-show scholars will be eligible to present at future conferences. 
And the hope is that future conferences will take place without the shadow of any travel ban. Boyer said he hopes the promised upcoming revised immigration executive order, doesn’t come to pass. “It hurts our academic freedom,” he said.
 .@smsaideman fulfils his unbreakable vow & receives my "Best Security Article" award at #ISA2017 after I could not attend due to #MuslimBan. pic.twitter.com/rnpswPZ35C
 — Aisha Ahmad (@ProfAishaAhmad) February 25, 2017
The association officially came out against the travel order, saying it greatly threatens their careers.
“As a scholarly organization, ISA has a professional obligation to promote and protect the values of academic freedom,” they said in a statement. “As such, the ISA strongly condemns any action by any government which prevents the free movement of scholars engaged in research on international affairs, or any other scholarly discipline.”
Their Academic Freedom Committee charter outlines the definition of academic freedom violations, which include revocation of academic degrees, arrest or worse.
When it comes to future conferences, ISA is prepared to relocate out of the United States if need be.
“We had a lengthy and thoughtful debate last week on changing our site,” Dr. Boyer said.
The association is considering moving events to Canada in the near future, and then elsewhere going forward, if Trump’s new travel order continues to present issues for members and for academic freedom.
 #resistanceISA #resist #ISA2017 pic.twitter.com/QbvuWXGkFL
 — Oumar Ba (@OumarKBa) February 23, 2017
 Reading that #terrorismstudies edited volume on the plane because #Resistance and #IAmNotAfraid. #FlyingWhileMuslim #ISA2017 #ResistanceISA pic.twitter.com/DRUkk1Rrtu
 — Jennifer P Eggert (@j_p_eggert) February 25, 2017
