Non-Americans chime in on America's 2016 presidential election
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 

Sen. Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton shake hands during a Democratic presidential primary debate. (Photo: David Goldman, AP)
Corrections and clarifications: A previous version of this article misattributed a statement made by Farkhod Gaziev.
Americans aren’t the only ones eagerly following the 2016 presidential race — this year’s election cycle has also captured the interest of people abroad. We spoke with a handful to see what they had to say.
Adan Bonilla Chavez, 30, from Mexico City
“(Donald Trump) hates Mexican people, is Republican and is so conservative. It’s the perfect mix for big troubles between our countries. The relationship between Mexico and America could become more complicated.”
Savannah Murphy, 20, from Brighton, U.K.
“I don’t think a new president will somehow noticeably impact my country, but he or she will definitely impact events in the whole world, which can impact my country afterward. 
“I’m sure (Trump) would become much more moderate once president, but he’s likely to make very bad decisions in international policy. 
Farkhod Gaziev, 25, from Tashkent, Uzbekistan
“(The U.S. election system) is a situation when the interests of big capital and particular politicians are very strongly connected due to the unprecedented amount of money. A significant difference between America and Uzbekistan is that the U.S. election system doesn’t have clear leaders before the elections.”
“During (Clinton’s) visits (to Uzbekistan), she confirmed the United States’ willingness to further develop mutual beneficial cooperation with Uzbekistan. I think she will continue the current policy implemented by the Obama administration and will not make dramatic changes to the relationship with Uzbekistan. Considering (Trump) has called for a ban on Muslims entering the country and stated that, ‘Islam hates us,’ his relations with Uzbekistan and other Muslim countries will be one of the worst in the history of the United States.”
“I think the GOP overestimated (Rubio’s) candidacy by hoping that he will be the future of the Republican party. I agree with critics that he demonizes Obama all the time while not proposing alternative plans.” 
“Personally, if I were an American citizen, I would vote for Bernie Sanders. Who would have guessed one year ago that Sanders would be able to challenge Hillary Clinton?”
Justine Michel, 22, from Paris
“There is a lot of criticisms of the U.S. election system, and I can agree with some of them. Corruption is a big problem in my opinion. 
“Just please, no Trump for president. U.S. diplomats say their counterparts from different countries are already concerned about Trump’s presidency effects on U.S. relationships with the entire world.”
Melissa Passmore, 22, from Bregenz, Austria
“I’m actually really shocked at how many people don’t just see (Trump) as the joke that he clearly is. I believe if Trump becomes president that America’s economy will have a hard time and that will also impact Europe’s economy.
“Sanders is for education and he stands for Americans. He would be my favorite.”
Tomas Hegedus, 22, from Prague
“I hope Trump or Sanders won’t win because it seems to me that they wouldn’t be able to run the state. Sanders is way too idealistic and doesn’t know particular steps to achieve his goals.”
Maria Cristina Marquez Colas, 23, from Madrid
“Spain is a nation with diverse ethnicities where (Trump’s) racism will not be welcomed. The way he expresses himself is not appropriate for a politician. Clinton would be the first female president, which would make for some very interesting changes in terms of gender equality.
“I’m frustrated and disappointed that (Marco Rubio) dropped his presidential bid. He should be defending his position.”
Gabriel Chica Fernandez, 21, from Aranjuez, Spain
“In general terms, (the American political system) is a well-designed system, but it also makes it far easier for wealthy candidates to buy their candidacies by self-promoting themselves because of the magnitude of these campaigns. (The Spanish political system) is better in terms of political plurality and less monetary-tied.
“It’s worrying how the Republican party is becoming more and more radicalized by betting on more authoritarian leaders and not caring about a presidential candidate making extremely racist declarations.
“I’m sure Trump won’t win because he is too radical, and we will likely see a broken Republican party and a presidency of Hillary Clinton.
“(Rubio) clearly seemed like the Republican politician who should (have been) leading the candidates, but he had few options against Trump.”
Yannick Tona, 26, from Kigali, Rwanda
“The U.S. election can sometimes be harsh — especially this year. There’s less talk of policy and more attacks on each other.
“Clinton’s foreign policy toward Africa and Rwanda would be better than any candidate. She has a great understanding of the continent and Rwanda. I will hope that if Clinton is elected we will see an increasing of the aid to developing countries and a better relationship with countries in Africa.
“Frankly, I think Sanders has little interest in foreign policy. He would not change, cut or increase foreign aid. I am not sure what impact Trump’s election would have on Africa, but I strongly think he poses a risk to foreign policy.
“I was disappointed that (Rubio) suspended his bid. His foreign policy was not good to most GOPs, but I believed he would be interested in pursuing a relationship with African countries.”
Dean Kayton, 28, from Cape Town
“I feel there should be more competition and not only two dominant parties (in the U.S. political system). We suffer from the same mentality in South Africa, though. At least in America, the population gets some sort of say on who represents them.”
Tobi Carter is a Texas Christian University student and a USA TODAY College correspondent.
