LeBron James humbled by Sports Illustrated award
NEW YORK — LeBron James said he didn’t really prepare a speech to accept the Sports Illustrated Sportsperson of the Year award Monday night. But he knows the significance of each word he chooses, and what he wears — such as a safety pin on the lapel of his sports coat he wears on the SI cover.
The safety pin symbolism isn’t lost on anyone; groups of people across the country have been wearing them on their clothing since Donald Trump was elected president, a way to show support for minorities, immigrants, women and any other groups that fear physical or emotional abuse.
James knows what it means to be photographed wearing a safety pin on a magazine that named him its athlete of the year — largely in part for what he’s done off the court and in his community. As athletes across the nation, both in college and in various professional leagues, have become more outspoken and active on social issues and politics, it seems fitting that James was honored here Monday night, the same night Jim Brown, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Bill Russell received SI’s Muhammad Ali Legacy award.

Before the awards show, James’ company announced the creation of a multi-part documentary on Ali’s life that will air on HBO. James also recently donated $2.5 million to the Ali exhibit at the Smithsonian. His reverence for Ali is clear, and important.
“We know about how great of a champion he was inside the ring, but what he represented out of the ring was much more powerful, and that’s why he is the people’s champ,” James said Monday night.
That turned out to be the theme of the night — despite the comedic breaks courtesy of emcee J.B. Smoove, and a surprise live performance by rapper Kendrick Lamar, who gave multiple shoutouts to James as he nodded along to the beat.

Hip-hop artist Jay Z came on stage at the end of the night to introduce James. He spoke of the “grandiose expectations" that have always accompanied James, The Chosen One, The King. Jay Z spoke of James’s ability to win a championship for the city of Cleveland, and all of his basketball skills.
“But the man LeBron James is even better than the basketball player,” Jay Z said, citing James’s work with kids in Northeast Ohio.
Much like his idols.
“I’m not really supposed to be up here. This award is not for me,” James said in his speech, mentioning his wife, mother as well as award winners Abdul-Jabbar, Brown and Russell. “It wasn’t about you guys. The four most dominant athletes at that time didn’t care what happened to them. They sacrificed everything that could’ve happened to them, could’ve been stripped of everything they accomplished to that point.

“Their call and reasoning was for a night like tonight, that in 2016 in Brooklyn we all can sit up here as African-Americans, white Americans, as Mexicans, people from the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico. We can all sit in one room and say, ‘Wow, this is an unbelievable night.’ ”
Follow Nicole Auerbach on Twitter @NicoleAuerbach.
