Kevin Sumlin hits the reset button at Arizona
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: Amidst the confetti, Trysta Krick and George Schroeder break down Alabama's thrilling OT win. USA TODAY Sports

The beginning of the end for Kevin Sumlin at Texas A&M was not a 59-0 loss to Alabama or an embarrassing Johnny Manziel headline or going 3-3 against Mississippi State. Instead, it was the first week of December in 2013 when he signed a contract that ensured he’d never have to worry about money ever again.
In retrospect, Sumlin’s fully guaranteed six-year, $30 million contract extension — signed after his second season at Texas A&M — was one of the most significant moments in the history of college football because it was the first time a coach who hadn’t yet proved to be elite was paid like an elite coach. And from that moment, everything he did at Texas A&M was framed by the number that put him on par only with coaches who had won national championships.
It almost seems silly now, in a world where Gus Malzahn is going to make $7 million per season and where you can set your clock by Kirk Ferentz getting his contract extended, that Sumlin’s contract became an issue in how he was perceived. But it was, because even as coaches eventually signed new deals that surpassed his, it was impossible to get over the idea that in his third season, the only coaches whose contracts compared were Nick Saban, Mack Brown, Bob Stoops, Urban Meyer and Les Miles, as if he constantly had to prove to fans and media (I’m guilty of this, too) that he deserved to be paid that much money.
“It wasn’t distracting to me at all,” Sumlin said Tuesday during a phone conversation following his introductory news conference at Arizona. “The funny part is, it was public that (the buyout) was payable within 60 days. But if you looked at it, there were three or four bigger ones than mine that nobody talked about.”
He’s right, of course. For all the hand-wringing about whether he was living up to the contract, Sumlin’s buyout ended up at $10.5 million, behind what Arkansas had to pay Bret Bielema (could be as much as $15.4 million), what UCLA had to pay Jim Mora ($12 million) and what Arizona State had to pay Todd Graham ($12 million).
That’s important to think about as Sumlin settles into his promising new job at Arizona because, in many ways, you wonder in this coaching environment whether he might yet again be a step ahead of the game.
Unless you’re competing for national championships — and realistically, there are only about seven schools right now who are doing that — Sumlin’s quality of life at Arizona is going to be better than 99% of his peers, even though now he’ll be more like the 50th highest-paid coach in the country rather than in the top 10.
“It was the right time and right place for me,” Sumlin said. “It was a good fit.”

When coaches get fired, there’s typically some big takeaway or major failure they have to address at their next stop. For Sumlin, though, it’s hard to really put your finger on any major hole in the program he had at Texas A&M. He won, he just didn’t win enough. He was there six years and never put a bad product on the field, but Texas A&M thought it should be getting more, especially for what it was paying.
When Texas A&M blew that 44-17 lead to UCLA, what card did Board of Regents member Tony Buzbee play in his now-infamous Facebook rant? It was the contract. When the famously taciturn former Texas A&M athletics director Eric Hyman talked to the Fort Worth Star-Telegram last fall, what was the biggest topic of conversation? It was the contract.
“I had worked with Steve Spurrier for years, and he was paid a heck of a lot less than Coach Sumlin,” Hyman told the newspaper. “And he won national championships after conference championships. And then you are making this commitment to a person, and again I don’t blame Kevin, that’s never won a conference championship.”
Five years after Sumlin’s landmark deal, however, it doesn’t seem like anyone in college athletics has learned anything. Heck, it took about two seconds after Texas A&M had cleared out Sumlin’s office to offer Jimbo Fisher $75 million over 10 years, all of it guaranteed. There already is hand-wringing in Auburn about Malzahn’s new deal, which prevented him from going to Arkansas but was followed by a disheartening loss to UCF in the Peach Bowl. Jim Harbaugh is making $7 million and hasn’t cracked the top two in his division yet. Athletics directors are still giving out extensions and raises like candy, even when there’s no threat that their coach is going to leave.
(Not to pick on Will Muschamp or South Carolina, but they just gave him a $1.1 million raise a few days ago. Why? Where’s Muschamp going? Sure, he’s done a nice job there, but is there some law that says you can’t tell Jimmy Sexton to go pound sand after one of his clients wins nine games? All this will accomplish is ensure fans want everybody fired if the Gamecocks go 6-6 next season.)
After all the abuse he took last year, Sumlin might finally have this thing figured out. He got his big payday, and now he’s at a program with plenty of upside and a fan base that will be thrilled if he wins nine games.
That number is significant because at A&M last season, it wouldn’t have been enough to save his job. That was made clear by athletics director Scott Woodward in an interview at SEC Media Days on the Paul Finebaum Show, a moment that still seems to chafe Sumlin.
“When the expectation level is public months before the season, that was probably the biggest distraction of the whole year,” he said.
This is a good time for Sumlin to hit the reset button. After Texas A&M, he intentionally got out of the spotlight for a while, took a vacation and decided he had the energy to jump right back into coaching, but only if the right opportunity came along. At 53 and his reputation still intact, he could be a little bit picky.
“Enlightenment is getting as far away as you can and not hearing, ‘Hey, coach,’ for three or four days and reflect and think about what’s really happened because when you’re in it you don’t have time,” Sumlin said. “Until those words come out of somebody’s mouth to tell you that you’re done, then it really hits you. You reassess everything, you look at everything.”
But he doesn’t have to reinvent himself. He’ll recruit well at Arizona, and with Khalil Tate as an established star at quarterback, he has a chance to get off to a fast start just like he did at Texas A&M. Though the circumstances are different — unlike Tate, Manziel hadn’t played a down when Sumlin arrived — it wouldn’t be shocking if history repeated itself a bit.
Only this time, when people talk about the contract, it will be in a much different context. If Sumlin wins eight or more games, like he did each one of his first five seasons in College Station, he’ll look like an absolute bargain.

 Kevin Sumlin was hired by Arizona. The former Texas A&M and Houston coach has an 86-43 record over 10 seasons. USA TODAY Sports
