Delamaide: Wall Street reform bid rings hollow
WASHINGTON — Labor unions and other activist groups launched an effort to reform Wall Street last week, but their timing and their methods raise some questions about how serious they are.
The initiative, called “Take On Wall Street,” bills itself as the grownup version of Occupy Wall Street. It includes union groups from the AFL-CIO to the American Federation of Teachers and the Communication Workers of America, consumer activist organizations, and the ubiquitous bank critic, Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts.
Their agenda includes major reforms such as reinstating the Glass-Steagall separation between commercial and investment banking, breaking up the big banks, and imposing a “speculation tax” on financial transactions.
If this sounds familiar, it’s because it copies almost verbatim the plan that Bernie Sanders has been touting as his core message in his year-long quest for the Democratic nomination. Even the name of the initiative comes directly from Sanders’ campaign website.
Sanders has been so fiercely insistent on Wall Street reform that he has been criticized as a one-issue candidate, though of course he has campaigned for a broader agenda of economic and social reform.
What’s curious about the initiative, which a Washington Post headline assures us intends to “inflict real pain on big banks,” is that many of its backers declined to endorse Sanders’ campaign and in fact often chose to endorse his rival for the nomination, Hillary Clinton, even though she has specifically rejected many of their objectives.
So while they promise a number of “direct actions” in coming months, it seems they have missed one of their best chances to promote reform in their failure to join forces with the one candidate who has arguably done more to energize voters on this issue than anyone else.
Warren, for instance, after declining to carry her anti-bank crusade into the presidential campaign herself, pointedly declined to endorse Sanders, even though he has been a natural ally in her cause.
The AFL-CIO under its president, Richard Trumka, has declined to endorse either Democratic candidate, even though Clinton has been persistently criticized by union members for her ties to Wall Street through extravagant speaking fees and campaign donations.
The Teachers Federation, under its president Randi Weingarten, was the first national union to endorse Clinton in spite of this record, so that the union’s commitment to Wall Street reform, like Clinton’s, now rings somewhat hollow.
Who knows what difference it would have made in Sanders’ momentum in the primary campaign if these influential progressive forces seeking Wall Street reform had backed him from the beginning.
The kindest explanation for their inaction is that no one expected Sanders to do as well as he has in generating enthusiasm for reform and these would-be reformers were afraid to get on the wrong side of the Democratic candidate who seemed destined to win.
In short, they lacked the courage of their conviction. The Communications Workers, for instance, actually did endorse Sanders and have considerably more credibility now in agitating for real reform.
A less kind explanation for this tardy and half-hearted initiative is that these backers are not really serious about getting any meaningful reform. Unions are placating members, politicians are stroking their egos, and activist groups are getting donations.
Without considerable and consistent backing from the highest levels of government, the new initiative will be no match for the banking lobby.
Clinton is still likely to get the Democratic nomination despite stumbling in her campaign against Sanders, though it is far from certain at this point given her high negatives that she will defeat Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, in the general election.
Even if she does win, Clinton will certainly go no further than tweaking the Dodd-Frank financial reform. The only agenda item from Take On Wall Street that she has unambiguously backed is to eliminate the “carried interest” loophole that allows hedge fund managers to pay capital gains tax on their income instead of the higher income tax rate.
But, given Clinton’s avowedly incrementalist approach to reform, it’s an even bet that pushback from the Republicans would block even that symbolic change.
In short, it is doubtful, given the grip of the financial lobby on mainstream politicians, that there will be any real progress even if Clinton keeps the White House for the Democrats.
The one real chance to get significant Wall Street reform on the order ostensibly sought by this initiative was the “political revolution” championed by Sanders, and for whatever reasons those who are now making a lot of noise about reform blew that chance.
The only reason, in fact, that Take On Wall Street is getting any notice at all may be that Sanders is still campaigning.
If the Democratic Party establishment succeeds in its evident determination to consign Sanders and his reform movement back into oblivion, this initiative is not likely to get any traction.
And if the initiative’s backers think they will be able to tap into the enthusiasm his campaign has generated, they may well be faced with the question from Sanders’ erstwhile supporters: Where were you when we needed you?
Columnist Darrell Delamaide — @ddelamaide on Twitter — has reported on business and economics from New York, Paris, Berlin and Washington for Dow Jones news service, Barron's, Institutional Investor and Bloomberg News, among others.
CONNECTTWEET 2 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1WWMbS3
