Tech Five: Samsung acquires cloud company
CONNECTTWEET 8 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Corrections & Clarifications: Airbnb is the company whose $1 billion debt facility will be spent on global growth strategies. 
SAN FRANCISCO – Airbnb signed a $1 billion debt facility deal in effort to expand globally, while Microsoft and Samsung made major acquisitions. 
 Those deals are among five major tech companies worth watching Thursday:
Airbnb. The private room-sharing company signed a $1 billion debt facility deal with a group of large U.S. banks including JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup and Bank of America, Bloomberg reported. The funds would allow Airbnb to spend on global growth strategies and expand beyond home-sharing, persons familiar with the situation told Bloomberg. Airbnb remains one of the most valuable startups at a $25 billion valuation, but recently came under fire for discriminating against transgender and African-American tenants and homeowners.
Samsung acquired cloud company Joyent for an undisclosed amount on Thursday. The San Francisco, Calif.-based company will still operate as a standalone company, but Joyent CEO Scott Hammond and other executives will work with Samsung on cloud computing and Internet of Things development.
Microsoft (MSFT). The same week Microsoft reported it would acquire professional networking service LinkedIn, the tech giant announced it bought messaging app developer Wand Labs for an undisclosed amount. The move is to strengthen the company’s messaging intelligence strategy, said Microsoft Corporate Vice President David Ku in a press release. Shares were up about 1% midday Thursday to $50.15.
Cavium (CAVM) stock was down 13% at $41.62 on Thursday. The San Jose, Calif.-based semiconductor company said Wednesday it would acquire network equipment marker QLogic for $1.36 billion to help expand in the data center and storage market. “QLogic’s industry leading products extend our market position in the data center, cloud and storage markets, and further diversifies our revenue and customer base,” said Syed Ali, president and CEO of Cavium, in a press release.
Oracle (ORCL). Shares were down 0.5% at $38.25 midday Thursday, but the cloud company is expected to report strong growth when it released its fourth-quarter earnings later in the day, according to MarketWatch. Oracle has declined 4.4% since November 2015, due in part to recent success from giants Amazon and Google in the cloud business.
Follow Allana Akhtar on Twitter: @allanaakh.
CONNECTTWEET 8 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1ttiLyB
