Senate panel advances Mukasey - USATODAY.com
WASHINGTON — A Senate panel's narrow endorsement of attorney general nominee Michael Mukasey clears the way for the full Senate to confirm him by next week.
In an 11-8 vote, Mukasey on Tuesday won the support of the Senate Judiciary Committee's nine Republicans and two of its 10 Democrats, Sens. Charles Schumer of New York, who had recommended the retired federal judge, and Dianne Feinstein of California.
Mukasey's confirmation, which had seemed assured after the first day of his hearings last month, was nearly derailed the next day by his broad interpretation of executive power and his refusal to say that "waterboarding" is torture. The controversial interrogation method simulates drowning. 
"Before the waterboard issue arose, Judge Michael Mukasey was deemed to be an ideal candidate for the next attorney general of the United States, almost as if he had come out of central casting," said Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, the committee's senior Republican.
Feinstein and Schumer made clear the waterboarding issue will not end with Mukasey's confirmation. They said they were swayed by Mukasey's promise that he will enforce a law banning waterboarding if Congress passes it. 
Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., who voted against Mukasey, said President Bush might veto such a law. 
"Some have sought to find comfort in Judge Mukasey's personal assurance that he would enforce a future new law against waterboarding if this Congress were to pass one," Leahy said. "Unsaid, of course, is the fact that any such prohibition would have to be enacted over the veto of this president."
Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, praised Mukasey's independence. "I don't believe that he would allow any illegal program to go forward," Grassley said. "And I don't believe that he would bow to any kind of pressure, even from the president."
Mukasey is likely to win confirmation by the full Senate, where Democrats hold a 51-49 edge. Many Democrats, including Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., say they will oppose him. Sen. Joe Lieberman, I-Conn., who caucuses with the Democrats, has said he will vote to confirm Mukasey, his classmate from law school. 
The vote could take place as early as Thursday but is more likely to be next week, Reid spokesman Jim Manley said. 
"It is of crucial importance that our next attorney general be able to stand up to the president and for the rule of law," Reid said. "Because I am not confident that Judge Mukasey will, I will oppose his nomination."
Bush said last week that he will not send another nominee to Capitol Hill if the Senate refuses to confirm Mukasey. That would leave the Justice Department with an acting attorney general and recess appointments unapproved by the Senate for 10 other top Justice positions.
If Mukasey is confirmed, he would preside over a Justice Department in disarray. Many division heads have left in the past eight months, and 22 of 93 judicial districts have acting or temporary U.S. attorneys. 
Former attorney general Alberto Gonzales resigned Sept. 17 amid controversy over politicized hiring at the agency and the dismissals of nine U.S. attorneys.
The department "is in dire need of new leadership," said Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., who voted against Mukasey. 
Feinstein and Schumer said Mukasey is better than having an unconfirmed "caretaker" leading the Justice Department. "To accept such an unaccountable caretaker, I believe, would be to surrender the department to the extreme ideology of Vice President Cheney and his chief of staff, David Addington, without check," Schumer said.
Some committee members interpreted Mukasey's answers on waterboarding as a dodge. Mukasey also argued that because he had not been briefed on the CIA's classified interrogation methods, he could not give an opinion.
Specter said he was dissatisfied with Mukasey's testimony and written answers on waterboarding. He "was not on solid ground" when he said he did not know what waterboarding was, Specter said. "Waterboarding is generally well known," and not being briefed was "a flimsy excuse," he said. 
But Specter said he was reassured after an "extended conversation" Monday with Mukasey in which he confirmed that Congress has the authority to ban waterboarding under any circumstance and that Bush does not have constitutional power to disregard the ban. "With his assurances in writing that he will back us up, that's good enough for me," Specter said.
Share this story:
