NFL hot seat rankings: Which coaches could follow fired Jeff Fisher, Gus Bradley
CLOSE

 Buffalo coach takes questions from the media regarding his future with the team. USA TODAY Sports

Gus Bradley and Jeff Fisher joined the unemployment line less than a week apart. The Jacksonville Jaguars fired Bradley, who went 14-48 in four seasons, after Sunday's loss. The Los Angeles Rams let Fisher go six days earlier. But they won't be the last. Here's an updated installment of our weekly hot seat rankings:
1. Rex Ryan, Buffalo Bills: Rumors of his imminent demise after just two seasons have resurfaced with a vengeance. And why not? The Bills will miss the playoffs for the 17th consecutive season. They at least avoided the humiliation of losing to the winless Cleveland Browns in Week 15, but that may only delay the inevitable no matter how much Ryan's players support him. Last week: 6

2. Mike McCoy, San Diego Chargers: The injury-ravaged Bolts are assured of a last-place finish, though they've been almost as tough an out as their AFC West brethren. But GM Tom Telesco hasn't committed to McCoy beyond this season even though he's kept this club highly competitive despite the missing players and questions about the franchise's future in 2017 and beyond. We'd venture McCoy has done an impressive enough job to quickly find work if the Chargers no longer want his services. Last week: 5
3. Todd Bowles, New York Jets: His team was again an embarrassment on the field in Saturday's loss to the Miami Dolphins and off it (this means you, Sheldon Richardson). Last week: 2
4. Marvin Lewis, Cincinnati Bengals: His team's final two games are against teams scrapping for playoff spots, and the Bengals' performance, which was strong in Sunday's loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers, will likely be an indicator of their coach's fate. Last week: 3
5. John Fox, Chicago Bears: His team has lost five of six, each defeat coming to an opponent with postseason aspirations. But Fox's players have been highly competitive in all of those games, including Sunday's comeback effort against the Green Bay Packers, save a blowout at Tampa Bay on Nov. 13. So give Fox points for instilling fight to a depleted roster that lacked playmakers to begin with. The question will be whether he (and/or the front office) want to see this culture change through. Last week: 4 
Cooler seat (for now): Dan Quinn, Atlanta Falcons
***
Follow Nate Davis on Twitter @ByNateDavis
PHOTOS: Week 14 NFL action
