News Corp. takes Amplify loss, beats earnings
Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated News Corp.’s plans for its Amplify digital education company. It will cease marketing the Amplify tablet but the rest of Amplify remains in business.
News Corp, publisher of The Wall Street Journal and the New York Post, said Wednesday that its flagging Amplify digital education business led the company to a net loss in its fiscal fourth quarter.
 News Corp., controlled by media mogul Rupert Murdoch, reported a net loss of $379 million for the quarter ending June 31, compared to net income of $12 million in the prior year.
Earnings per share, after adjustments for items including a $371 million impairment charge related to Amplify, were 7 cents, compared to 1 cent in the same period last year, besting analysts' expectations of 5 cents, according to FactSet.
Shares were up 1.8% in after-hours trading Wednesday to $14.10.
Amplify is the digital education company, acquired as Wireless Generation by News Corp. in 2010, that included tablets as part of its curriculum to help improve learning. The company will cease its marketing of Amplify tablets but will continue to market its digital curriculum, educational games and consulting services. News Corp. is reviewing its digital education strategy and is in the final stages of talks with a potential buyer for the Amplify business, CEO Robert Thomson said in a call with analysts.
Company-wide revenues fell 2% to $2.14 billion, compared to fourth quarter revenues last year of $2.19 billion.
News and Information Services, the unit that includes Dow Jones, The Wall Street Journal and other newspapers, reported a 10% decline in revenue to $1.4 billion. Advertising sales fell 13%. Circulation revenues fell 5%, due to negative foreign currency fluctuations.
Fiscal 2015 full-year revenue of $8.6 billion was up 1% over the previous year. The net loss for fiscal 2015 was $149 million, compared to net income of $237 million last year.
“With disciplined internal investments, strategic acquisitions and ongoing product innovation, we have aggressively shifted the company to be more global and more digital," Thomson said in a statement.
Follow Mike Snider on Twitter: @MikeSnider
CONNECTTWEET 7 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Nrg9Wf
