Bob Dickey pledges commitment to CEO Action for Diversity & Inclusion
CONNECTTWEET 141 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Bob Dickey, Gannett’s President and CEO, has recently signed on to the CEO Action for Diversity & Inclusion.
 Launched on Monday, June 12, the initiative is “the largest CEO-driven business commitment to advance diversity and inclusion within the workplace.” Dickey signed on to this commitment along with upwards of 150 CEO’s from leading world companies, pledging to “act on supporting a more inclusive workplace for millions of our employees, our communities and society at large.”
 Representing over 50 industries and all 50 states, the coalition aims to affect millions of employees with its efforts while achieving its overall goal of “rallying the business community together to take measureable action in advancing diversity in the workplace.”
 By signing onto this commitment, Dickey has pledged to both increase diversity and foster inclusion by taking the following steps: “1. Continue to cultivate workplaces that support open dialogue on complex, and sometimes difficult, conversations about diversity and inclusion, 2. Implement and expand unconscious bias education, and 3. Share best known—and unsuccessful—actions.”
 Dickey, who has been with Gannett since 1990 and has served as CEO since 2015, notes his excitement about Gannett’s involvement with this initiative as “it aligns with Gannett’s promotion of diversity and inclusion, not just in the workplace but beyond. This coalition will only grow in its importance, and I look forward to representing Gannett amongst other organizations committed to similar values.”
 The CEO Action for Diversity & Inclusion leadership team is comprised of a committee of CEOs and executive leadership members from the following companies: Accenture, BCG, Deloitte US, The Executive Leadership Council, EY, General Atlantic, KPMG, New York Life, Procter & Gamble, and PwC. For more information on the coalition and its mission, click here.
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2tn94Cn
