Baseball teams limit consumption of energy drinks by players
PHOENIX – Major League Baseball, which banned illegal performance-enhancing drugs and amphetamines, now has several teams restricting the use of energy drinks.

By Doug Pensinger, Getty Images
Teams are discouraging the use of Red Bull and other energy drinks, with most banning it in the minor leagues.
EnlargeClose
By Doug Pensinger, Getty Images
Teams are discouraging the use of Red Bull and other energy drinks, with most banning it in the minor leagues.
Sponsored Links
On this, the players say, teams are going too far.
"It's asinine," said Arizona Diamondbacks closer J.J. Putz, who typically consumes one Red Bull drink in the seventh inning. "What are they going to ban next, coffee? Soft drinks? It's so bizarre."
The Diamondbacks and Houston Astros have stopped providing energy drinks in their clubhouse and are discouraging players from using them, citing harmful effects. They can't ban the beverages because they are not prohibited in the collective bargaining agreement. Spokesman Greg Bouris said the players union is unaware of any restrictions and plans to look into it.
Teams, though, can act in the minor leagues and many have. Several organizations, including the Milwaukee Brewers, even prohibit minor leaguers from using clubhouse refrigerators to store their energy drinks.
"We take the same education approach with the energy drinks that we take with supplements," said Ross Atkins, vice president/player development of the Cleveland Indians. "We ask why a player is using it, is there something else natural he could to improve his energy levels?"
The Astros began taking precautions in 2009 when reliever Wesley Wright was taken to a hospital and treated for dehydration. He said he drank several cans of Red Bull and soft drinks before pitching that afternoon.
"We've had a couple of issues regarding dehydration," Astros GM Ed Wade said, "and our people think they can be traced to misuse, overuse of energy drinks. It just seemed that we shouldn't be creating an environment where we're almost facilitating the effects of dehydration."
Yet, with a 162-game season and frequent travel, Pittsburgh Pirates right-hander Jason Grilli says everyone is looking for an advantage.
"The reason guys take energy drinks is because there's not anything else (legal) to take," Grilli said. "Let's face it, the competitive edge is why the whole steroid thing got rampant."
Players were subject to penalties for use performance-enhancing drugs, such as steroids, starting in 2004, and amphetamines were added to MLB's drug policy a year later.
There's no evidence that energy drinks are a performance-enhancer, or should be prohibited, says Gary Wadler, former chairman of WADA's banned-substance-list committee. Tracey Halliday, vice president/communications of the American Beverage Association, says she believes energy drinks are often the subject of misinformation.
"We are strong advocates of moderation," she said. "But when it comes to caffeine, the caffeine included in there is half the caffeine of a similar cup of coffee. It's a safe ingredient approved by the FDA."
Pirates All-Star closer Joel Hanrahan, who typically consumes two Red Bull drinks a day, said: "I don't see why it should be banned. You've got to go out there 162 games. You're playing 21 games in a row, and switching time zones, and you want to be mentally and physically ready.
"If fans can sit in the stands and drink it, why can't we drink it during games? We're human, too."
Contributing: Seth Livingstone
 For more information about reprints & permissions, visit our FAQ's. To report corrections and clarifications, contact Standards Editor Brent Jones. For publication consideration in the newspaper, send comments to letters@usatoday.com. Include name, phone number, city and state for verification. To view our corrections, go to corrections.usatoday.com. 
Posted | Updated 

Most Popular E-mail Newsletter

Sign up to get:
Top viewed stories, photo galleries and community posts of the day
Most popular right now:
