'Mileage runs': On these trips, the airline miles trump the destination
TORONTO – The end of the year means holiday parties, family gatherings and the inevitable New Year’s Eve countdown. But for many frequent-fliers, the expiring calendar means it’s time for something else: a “mileage run” for elite status. 
For the uninitiated, a “mileage run” is a trip booked specifically for the purpose of earning frequent-flier miles.
This time of year, the trips are often taken by loyalty program members who are close to earning an elite status tier, but need to take just one more trip to get there. And since the qualifying window for earning elite status resets at the end of each calendar year, December becomes the prime month for such flights.
What those mileage-runners are seeking are miles (or dollars) that count toward elite status. At most big airlines, it is given when a traveler flies 25,000 “elite qualifying miles” (EQMs) in a calendar year. Higher elite thresholds are typically earned at 50,000, 75,000 and 100,000 miles, though the details vary by airline. (Delta’s highest “Diamond” status, for example, takes 125,000 EQMs.)
Adding to the mix, airlines now have spending requirements for elite status – creating a second component for some mileage-runners. Qualifying for the 50,000-mile status at most big airlines, for example, also requires hitting a spending threshold of $6,000 “elite qualifying dollars” (EQDs) that are spent on airfare.
Last SlideNext Slide
With that requirement now in play, that means some elite fliers have now hit their EQM targets but must still buy another ticket to hit their EQD threshold. 
What makes these hoops worth it for many frequent-fliers are the perks that come with elite status. Perhaps the most sought after are upgrades to lie-flat seats on overseas flights. Also to be had: Priority checking and boarding and fee waivers for checked bags. Domestically, many elite frequent-fliers at the “big three” U.S. airlines are given complimentary first-class upgrades when there are empty seats in the front of the cabin. 
We know some Today in the Sky readers are making their own runs this year. Here's mine (and see how to add yours at the end):
I made it into December with 74,645 elite-qualifying miles (EQMs) on American. That would’ve comfortably qualified me for American’s “Platinum” status level, which is earned after flying 50,000 EQMs. But it also left me just 355 short of qualifying for American’s newly created and more generous “Platinum Pro” status. That begins at 75,000 EQMs.
When no additional work travel materialized, I decided it was time to plot my own mileage run. I had already cleared American’s spending threshold (EQDs), so I simply needed the miles. And, with American awarding elite-level fliers a minimum of 500 EQMs per flight, I really could fly anywhere. Any itinerary would push me over the threshold. 
So I began considering my options.
 United Airlines' last Boeing 747 takes off over San Francisco on its last passenger flight on November 7, 2017. It is the last passenger flight the jet will ever make for the airline after 47 years of service. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
 “I had to be here,” said passenger John Vanderford, shown here on the right, as he partied with other Flight 747 customers prior to boarding. “It’s the last 747 flight. I remember flying it as a kid, on this exact route — San Francisco to Honolulu." Ben Mutzabaugh, USA TODAY
 A decidedly retro look for one passenger aboard the last United Airlines Boeing 747 flight on Nov. 7, 2017. The airline went with a special 1970s theme for the final flight, which ended 47 years of 747 service. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
 United Airlines' last Boeing 747 takes off over San Francisco on its last passenger flight on November 7, 2017. It is the last passenger flight the jet will ever make for the airline after 47 years of service. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
 United Airlines' last Boeing 747 takes off over San Francisco on its last passenger flight on November 7, 2017. It is the last passenger flight the jet will ever make for the airline after 47 years of service. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
 United Airlines' last Boeing 747 takes off over San Francisco on its last passenger flight on November 7, 2017. It is the last passenger flight the jet will ever make for the airline after 47 years of service. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
 United Airlines' last Boeing 747 takes off over San Francisco on its last passenger flight on November 7, 2017. It is the last passenger flight the jet will ever make for the airline after 47 years of service. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
 United Airlines' last Boeing 747 takes off over San Francisco on its last passenger flight on November 7, 2017. It is the last passenger flight the jet will ever make for the airline after 47 years of service. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
 Taking the 1970s theme of United Airlines' last Boeing 747 quite seriously, a passenger dressed in a lime green leisure suit 'lights a smoke' aboard the last Boeing 747 flight for the jet on November 7, 2017. Jeremy Dwyer-Lindgren, special for USA TODAY
Last SlideNext Slide
First: Would it be a same-day trip or overnight? Many mileage-runners are happy enough to fly to their destinations and get on the next flight home. I’m not one of those. I prefer to spend some time at the destination – even if the trip is just for the miles. So, for me, an overnight itinerary was preferable.
Next was “when?” Work functions, holiday parties and other commitments gave me my own list of “blackout dates.” Then there were my own plans for Christmas and New Year’s, not to mention the sky-high last-minute fares for those peak travel days. That ruled out even more dates; my December calendar proved surprisingly inflexible. I was left with Dec. 20-22 as really my only workable dates.
So, where to? Boston or New York seemed like good possibilities for cheap last-minute flights from my hometown airport: Washington’s Reagan National. Boston was surprisingly expensive. New York worked, but I kept looking.
I ran fares and cross-checked hotel prices at the various destinations I was considering. New York was quickly scratched. Options narrowed. Miami; Hartford, Conn.; and Charleston, S.C., eventually emerged as the options that best mixed affordability, personal interest and weather. (What Northerner wouldn’t want to go to Florida in December?)
Then a wildcard emerged: Toronto. The fare wasn’t cheap, well over $400. And it meant heading north to Canada for the first day of winter. But Toronto is home to several friends, including my best friend from college. Not coincidentally, I was overdue to visit -- and I had a free place to stay.
I flew the first leg of my trip on Wednesday, Dec. 20 – clinching the 500 EQMs that I needed to climb to the next rung on the elite-status ladder.
Best of all, I got two unexpected days with a old friend and enjoyed a beautiful snowfall in Toronto that began on winter’s first official day.
Now it’s time for your stories. If you are taking a mileage run this year, tell us your details. How far did you have to fly? How many EQDs did you have to earn? And, of course, why did you go and how did you pick it? 
Share your details by leaving a comment, or tag @TodayintheSky on Twitter with the #mileagerun hashtag, and we'll compile some of the most interesting responses in a follow-up story. Tell us how many miles (or dollars you needed and where you went to get them. And, of course, be sure to share and additional tidbits our fellow readers may be interested in.
