Lance Armstrong trial delayed until May 2018
The U.S. government’s $100 million civil fraud trial against Lance Armstrong has been delayed six months, from November to May, after a federal judge on Friday granted Armstrong’s request to postpone it.
The former cyclist requested the delay last week, telling the judge a scheduling conflict would prevent one of his attorneys, John Keker, from participating in the trial that had been scheduled for Nov. 6.
Keker and attorney Elliot Peters started representing Armstrong in 2011, when Armstrong was facing a criminal fraud investigation that was later dropped. The government then filed this civil lawsuit against him that could cost him nearly $100 million.
“I am confident I am not liable under any theory articulated by plaintiffs and hope that this matter can be tried as soon as possible,” Armstrong wrote in a signed declaration in Austin, Texas, last week. “But plaintiffs’ allegations are serious, and I want the counsel of my choice representing me at trial. That is Mr. Keker and Mr. Peters together.”
In February, Keker also had asked for a 2018 trial date because of a possible scheduling conflict, but the government opposed it then and the judge set a Nov. 6 trial date. This time, the government did not oppose the request by Keker, whose reasons for it were filed under seal last week. U.S. District Judge Christopher Cooper set the new trial date for May 7 in Washington, D.C.
The delay means that this case will start trial about five years after the government filed suit against Armstrong — and more than 14 years after key incidents in the case took place.
The government is suing Armstrong on behalf the U.S. Postal Service after the Postal Service paid $32.3 million to sponsor Armstrong’s cycling team from 2000 to 2004. The government said the Postal Service never would have paid that if it had known the team was using performance-enhancing drugs and blood transfusions to cheat in races — all in violation of the team’s sponsorship contract.
“A delay of up to another six months probably will not adversely affect either party to any significant degree,” said Tony Anikeeff, an attorney who is not involved in this case but specializes in government contract cases for the firm Williams Mullen. “Trial preparation is often an intense effort that increases as one approaches trial date. Having extra time may help both parties to better refine their cases. The concern one has in any matter is that memories continue to fade.”
At issue is not whether Armstrong doped, which is he has admitted to doing. Instead, the case is about government contracts, false claims and whether the Postal Service was damaged by Armstrong’s conduct. The government said Armstrong lied about such doping to keep getting paid, essentially causing false claims to be submitted to the government for payment.
Under the False Claims Act, the government could get its money back in triple, nearly $100 million, with Armstrong possibly on the hook for all of it.
In his defense, Armstrong’s attorneys have responded by saying this is nonsense — that Armstrong did not cause false claims to be submitted to the government and that the Postal Service was not damaged by the doping. They said the Postal Service instead got what it bargained for from the sponsorship and profited from it, including receiving worldwide exposure for its brand while Armstrong won the Tour de France wearing the USPS jersey.
They have hired experts to help prove this point but have failed in their attempts to get the case thrown out before trial.
The government filed suit against Armstrong in 2013, shortly after he confessed to doping after more than a decade of denials. In doing so, the government joined a case originally filed in 2010 by former cyclist Floyd Landis, who is working with the government in this case against Armstrong as a government whistleblower. Landis, a former Postal Service teammate of Armstrong’s, also is a confessed doper but stands to get a cut of the damages if the government prevails.
Landis did not oppose postponing the trial date.
“Though we obviously would like to get this case before a jury promptly, we also want to conduct ourselves as civilized professionals in the process,” Landis’ attorney Paul Scott said.

 Lance Armstrong heads out with cyclists in Auckland, New Zealand in 2016. The disgraced Tour de France rider is in New Zealand to film a commercial, and put out a call on social media for local riders to join him on a ride along the Auckland Waterfront. Fiona Goodall
