11 romantic mountain hotels perfect for a winter visit
Park Hyatt Beaver Creek Resort and Spa, Colorado: Chock-full of amenities like an ice skating rink, heated outdoor pool, five hot tubs, a mineral pool, game room, and fitness center in the spa, this 190-room hotel manages to cater to both families and lovebirds. Couples will appreciate the fireside dining and cocktails, which are served both indoors and outdoors, while kiddos (and let’s be honest, the adults, too) will go nuts for the s’mores kits. To top it off, lodge-style rooms come with balconies with romantic mountain views and suites feature fireplaces, kitchenettes or both. Oyster.com
 Stowe Mountain Lodge, Vermont: The massive Stowe Mountain Lodge is far from intimate, but that just means there’s more space for you and your loved one to keep the spark alive. Bliss out at the inviting spa or swim laps in the big outdoor pool, which puts the mountains on display. There’s also an acclaimed restaurant, where you can toast to your wonderful relationship. Rooms are cozy — all have balconies and most have working fireplaces to stay snug when the temps dip low. Oyster.com
 The Peaks See Forever Rentals, Colorado: Couldn’t find a babysitter in time? Not to worry. The Peaks See Forever Rentals in Mountain Village, Colo., is the perfect romantic getaway when you have the kids in tow, too. Choose between a standalone cabin or two- to four-bedroom condo units. Cabins include wood-beamed ceilings, stone fireplaces and leather accents. Once you’ve tucked the little ones in, sneak in some alone time alongside a warm fire. Oyster.com
 Resort at Squaw Creek, Lake Tahoe: While Resort at Squaw Creek in Lake Tahoe might not be the most intimate (the sprawling property houses more than 400 rooms, after all), it doesn’t skimp on the gorgeous mountain and valley views. Even better, with resort to-dos like ice skating and dog-sledding, couples will have plenty of date activities to choose from. Those who want to spend a cozy night in can take advantage of the rooms with stone fireplaces and kitchens. And if your idea of romance means spending some quality time outside of the room, hit up one of the five on-site restaurants, the ski lift, hot tub or year-round heated pool, which is perfect for decompressing after a day on the slopes. Oyster.com
 Spring Creek Ranch, Jackson Hole: Set in a wildlife refuge more than 700 feet above the Jackson Valley, Spring Creek Ranch in Jackson Hole offers one of the most stunning views — if not the most stunning view — of the Tetons in the area. And you’ll be able to sneak a glimpse of the dramatic peaks from several spots around the property, including the rooms and acclaimed restaurant. After a day racing your sweetie down the slopes (a 35-minute drive will bring you to challenging hills right by Teton Village), soak in the heated outdoor pool, unwind in the renowned spa or curl up in the lodge-like rooms. Oyster.com
 Stein Eriksen Lodge, Park City: The luxurious 170-room Stein Eriksen Lodge balances adventure with rest and relaxation. Offering ski-in, ski-out access to Deer Valley Resort, the Park City property also features a relaxing spa, year-round outdoor heated pool with a whirlpool and fireplace, and two restaurants (try the tasty Stein burger). Rooms are spacious with whirlpool tubs and satellite TV; upgrade to a suite for a full kitchen and fireplace, if you wish. Oyster.com
 Trapp Family Lodge, Vermont: This charming 96-room lodge near the slopes in Stowe, Vt., is still owned and run by the actual von Trapp family (yes, as in the one whose story was told in "The Sound of Music"). And while the rooms are comfy and bright, they’re not the major draw here. Guests come for the three restaurants, on-site brewery with tastings, fitness center and three pools, including an adult-only option. Oh, and one look at the impressive mountain views from the room and common areas and you might just have the urge to belt your own version of “the hills are alive!” Oyster.com
 Topnotch Resort, Vermont: For a city-meets-country getaway, check into this secluded 89-room upscale resort, which is nestled amid 120 acres of forests and mountains. Leave the stress of your work email inbox back home and find your peace at the excellent on-site spa, which has multiple hot tubs. Or, take the plunge in either the indoor or outdoor pools (there’s an adult-only option) or relax by the fire in the guest lounge. There are also two outstanding restaurants on the property, both of which have locally sourced menus. Oyster.com
 The Whiteface Lodge, New York: Opened in 2005, this Adirondack mountain lodge in Lake Placid offers a luxurious escape. There are plenty of activities to fill your itinerary with in the winter (ice skating, snow shoeing and bowling, to name a few). The restaurant, which comes with a fireplace, is a great place to have delicious meals, while the spa offers a range of pampering treatments. There’s even an underground tunnel that connects to the heated outdoor pool and hot tubs during the cold weather plus s’mores around a bonfire in the evening and a movie theater to catch up on classic flicks. Oyster.com
 Viceroy Snowmass, Colorado: With several fireplaces, soft lighting in the hallways and an earthy color palette throughout, this Colorado mountain resort really knows how to set the mood. Cuddle up in front of the fire pit that’s situated next to the heated saline pool, by the glass-encased fireplace in the lobby, or in the privacy of your own rooms. Chic and homey, the property dials up the romance even more with a 7,000-square-foot spa that features a relaxation room. Couples who are looking for some slope action will be pleased with the prime ski-in, ski-out location and ski valet service. Oyster.com
Last SlideNext Slide

Now that the days are getting shorter and the temperatures are dipping lower, cozying up indoors sounds tempting. There are plenty of hotels nestled amid gorgeous mountains that are perfect for hibernating with your honey, whether it’s at the spa, alongside a crackling fireplace, in a heated pool or hot tub, or under a pile of comfy blankets in the room. From cozy lodges and cabins in Vermont to sprawling resorts in California and Colorado, these are the country’s most romantic mountain hotels to snuggle up in this winter season.
Resort at Squaw Creek, Lake Tahoe 
While Resort at Squaw Creek in Lake Tahoe might not be the most intimate (the sprawling property houses more than 400 rooms, after all), it doesn’t skimp on the gorgeous mountain and valley views. Even better, with resort to-dos like ice skating and dog-sledding, couples will have plenty of date activities to choose from. Those who want to spend a cozy night in can take advantage of the rooms with stone fireplaces and kitchens. And if your idea of romance means spending some quality time outside of the room, hit up one of the five on-site restaurants, the ski lift, hot tub or year-round heated pool, which is perfect for decompressing after a day on the slopes.
Viceroy Snowmass, Colorado
With several fireplaces, soft lighting in the hallways and an earthy color palette throughout, this Colorado mountain resort really knows how to set the mood. Cuddle up in front of the fire pit that’s situated next to the heated saline pool, by the glass-encased fireplace in the lobby, or in the privacy of your own rooms. Chic and homey, the property dials up the romance even more with a 7,000-square-foot spa that features a relaxation room. Couples who are looking for some slope action will be pleased with the prime ski-in, ski-out location and ski valet service.
Trapp Family Lodge, Vermont
This charming 96-room lodge near the slopes in Stowe, Vt., is still owned and run by the actual von Trapp family (yes, as in the one whose story was told in The Sound of Music). And while the rooms are comfy and bright, they’re not the major draw here. Guests come for the three restaurants, on-site brewery with tastings, fitness center and three pools, including an adult-only option. Oh, and one look at the impressive mountain views from the room and common areas and you might just have the urge to belt your own version of “the hills are alive!”
Stowe Mountain Lodge, Vermont
The massive Stowe Mountain Lodge is far from intimate, but that just means there’s more space for you and your loved one to keep the spark alive. Bliss out at the inviting spa or swim laps in the big outdoor pool, which puts the mountains on display. There’s also an acclaimed restaurant, where you can toast to your wonderful relationship. Rooms are cozy — all have balconies and most have working fireplaces to stay snug when the temps dip low.
Spring Creek Ranch, Jackson Hole
Set in a wildlife refuge more than 700 feet above the Jackson Valley, Spring Creek Ranch in Jackson Hole offers one of the most stunning views — if not the most stunning view — of the Tetons in the area. And you’ll be able to sneak a glimpse of the dramatic peaks from several spots around the property, including the rooms and acclaimed restaurant. After a day racing your sweetie down the slopes (a 35-minute drive will bring you to challenging hills right by Teton Village), soak in the heated outdoor pool, unwind in the renowned spa or curl up in the lodge-like rooms.
Stein Eriksen Lodge, Park City
The luxurious 170-room Stein Eriksen Lodge balances adventure with rest and relaxation. Offering ski-in, ski-out access to Deer Valley Resort, the Park City property also features a relaxing spa, year-round outdoor heated pool with a whirlpool and fireplace, and two restaurants (try the tasty Stein burger). Rooms are spacious with whirlpool tubs and satellite TV; upgrade to a suite for a full kitchen and fireplace, if you wish.
The Peaks See Forever Rentals, Colorado
Couldn’t find a babysitter in time? Not to worry. The Peaks See Forever Rentals in Mountain Village, Colo., is the perfect romantic getaway when you have the kids in tow, too. Choose between a standalone cabin or two- to four-bedroom condo units. Cabins include wood-beamed ceilings, stone fireplaces and leather accents. Once you’ve tucked the little ones in, sneak in some alone time alongside a warm fire.
Park Hyatt Beaver Creek Resort and Spa, Colorado
Chock-full of amenities like an ice skating rink, heated outdoor pool, five hot tubs, a mineral pool, game room, and fitness center in the spa, this 190-room hotel manages to cater to both families and lovebirds. Couples will appreciate the fireside dining and cocktails, which are served both indoors and outdoors, while kiddos (and let’s be honest, the adults, too) will go nuts for the s’mores kits. To top it off, lodge-style rooms come with balconies with romantic mountain views and suites feature fireplaces, kitchenettes or both.
The Majestic Yosemite Hotel, California
Built in 1927, The Majestic Yosemite Hotel is considered a National Historic Landmark. The 123-room stone and wood structure cohabitates with the pine trees, cliffs and canyons of Yosemite Valley. Hide out with your honey in a cozy room that offers stunning views of the Half Dome and El Captain summits. And while it might not be the most budget-friendly option, the lounge with 24-foot-high ceilings and large stone fireplace, a light-drenched dining room, and of course the stunning vistas are all worth the splurge.
Topnotch Resort, Vermont
For a city-meets-country getaway, check into this secluded 89-room upscale resort, which is nestled amid 120 acres of forests and mountains. Leave the stress of your work email inbox back home and find your peace at the excellent on-site spa, which has multiple hot tubs. Or, take the plunge in either the indoor or outdoor pools (there’s an adult-only option) or relax by the fire in the guest lounge. There are also two outstanding restaurants on the property, both of which have locally sourced menus.
The Whiteface Lodge, New York
Opened in 2005, this Adirondack mountain lodge in Lake Placid offers a luxurious escape. There are plenty of activities to fill your itinerary with in the winter (ice skating, snow shoeing and bowling, to name a few). The restaurant, which comes with a fireplace, is a great place to have delicious meals, while the spa offers a range of pampering treatments. There’s even an underground tunnel that connects to the heated outdoor pool and hot tubs during the cold weather plus s’mores around a bonfire in the evening and a movie theater to catch up on classic flicks.

 Bellagio, Las Vegas: With a name that’s lifted straight from the shores of Italy’s ultra-luxe Lake Como, this hotel is one of Vegas’ most storied luxury properties. Rooms here have just the right amount of glitz and glamor — helpful reminders of flashy Las Vegas just outside. Dining is some of the city’s best and most popular, including a Le Cirque outpost and the world’s largest chocolate fountain at Jean-Philippe. With its iconic dancing fountains, amazing botanical gardens, tons of elegant shopping, and a central location on The Strip, it’s hard to beat the Bellagio. Oyster.com
