How we became activists: Lauren Paul and Molly Thompson of Kind Campaign
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 
Welcome to our series “How I Became a …,” where we’re digging into the stories of accomplished and influential people and finding out how they got to where they are in their careers. We’re finding out what their biggest challenges, their biggest passions and their biggest pieces of wisdom are — for you.
Corrections and clarifications: A previous version of this story contained an incorrect credit on the photograph of the Kind Campaign founders.
Note: This interview has been lightly edited.
When Lauren Paul and Molly Thompson met at Pepperdine University, they connected over their vision for a world in which people are, simply, kinder to one another. Spurred by deep bullying wounds from their pasts, Paul and Thompson founded Kind Campaign and became activists, setting off on a cross-country road trip to film their documentary Finding Kind. 

Molly Thompson (left) and Lauren Paul. (Photo: Brandon Kidd)
The movement — which has reached across the United States and the globe — is helping to set off what they hope is a chain reaction of kindness around the world.
USA TODAY College caught up with them to talk all things dirty chais, road trips and, of course, kindness.
What’s your coffee order?
Lauren: I actually just do black coffee. I don’t do anything in my coffee. But if I’m feeling fun, I’ll do an almond milk chai tea latte.
Molly: I get a chai tea latte with three shots of espresso. I really just go for it.
Who has been your biggest mentor?
Lauren: I’d say first and foremost, my parents. Growing up, they really encouraged me to go after whatever I was passionate about. They really encouraged that in all of their kids — not only encouraging us professionally and creatively, but (they) also really brought us up to be open-minded and open-hearted to anyone and everyone. I think that’s what really set the foundation for a lot of the community service work and the passion for this topic at a young age.
Outside of my parents, who are just incredible, I’d say Tom Shadyac, a feature film writer and director who, several years ago, decided to get in the documentary space, and actually both Molly and I had a class with him while we were at Pepperdine. I had the opportunity to intern on his documentary I Am, and he was just such a mentor and such an inspiring person in my life, and just taught me a lot about film and philanthropy. He ended up being a huge mentor on Finding Kind, our documentary. He actually ended up funding most of the film, and really just believed in what we were doing. I could definitely say that without his leadership and guidance and monetary help, it would have definitely looked like a very different journey from the beginning. It would have probably taken us a lot longer to get going and get off the ground.
A post shared by  Molly Thompson (@mollymaethomps) on May 18, 2017 at 5:48pm PDT
Molly: My parents, just because the role our parents play in our lives shape us into who we are today, and from a young age them just encouraging me to look out for others and support others and look for ways to help others. That played a huge part in my life, not just growing up but obviously to what I do today as well. Also, just encouraging me to work hard and showing me that hard work does pay off. They really shaped me in to the person I am today. My mom and my dad played a huge role in that, and I just look up to them both so much in different ways. It’s so cool to see how that relationship has changed since I’ve gotten older, and I continue to look up to them and learn from them, and see the sacrifices that they’ve made for me throughout my life.
Specifically to Kind Campaign is an incredible woman named Jessica Weiner. Kind Campaign kind of crossed paths with her early on. As we were shooting the film we got connected with her, and she’s featured throughout the film because she’s this amazing self-esteem expert and a leading voice in the female empowerment space. But separate from her role in Finding Kind, she has just been an amazing mentor for both Lauren and I throughout the work that we do with Kind Campaign. She’s kind of the person that we often call upon to seek advice, or to talk through different things with. She’s just been there for us in so many ways through out the past several years. She’s just an incredible person, and the work she does in this space is just amazing.
What is the coolest thing you’ve ever done?
Lauren: Just looking back on our journey with Kind Campaign over the last eight years, I love being able to say that I’m really proud of what the two of us have accomplished. Looking back on every chapter of the organization, and the film, knowing that Molly and I have made it happen, it’s kind of a trip, really — just making Finding Kind was so cool. Not only as a filmmaker was it gratifying, but getting to go on that journey and make that film really sparked Kind Campaign itself.
A few years ago I had the opportunity to join one of my best friends, Jedidiah Jenkins, to hike Macchu Picchu, and we ended up hiking from dark in the morning until nighttime, every single day for five days. We were trekking through jungles, through snow, through little villages. It was just such a unique experience, and we all bonded in such a cool way. It was an incredible, spiritual experience that I’ll hold with me my whole life.
My wedding was the coolest day. I married my best friend, and the day was just so special, having everyone in our lives in the same room. Just the energy and the love that filled that day was just the best experience.
A post shared by  Lauren Paul (@laurenpaul8) on Sep 1, 2015 at 6:36pm PDT
Molly: The road trip to shoot the film and the road trip after, being in a minivan driving across the country the way we did, is just so unique and gave us the opportunity to meet so many incredible people across the country. It was just so special and cool to get a peek into the lives of all of the amazing humans across the country, and to see America the way that we did. Being able to continuously do what we do and go into schools the way that we do is a pretty amazing thing. I love that we are able to connect with people the way that we are.
My wedding was just the most special day, and I will say that it was my favorite day. And it was, until last year, when I gave birth to my little girl. My whole life just now… My heart beats for her, and my world revolves around her. Having her, and going on this adventure with her is so incredible. I feel so lucky to be her mom, and she’s definitely my biggest, greatest adventure for sure.
What does a typical day look like for you?
Lauren: When we’re on tour, it can be pretty crazy. Our spring tour and our fall tours can look a little different. In the spring, we’ll fly into one location — so, say we go to Seattle, we’ll speak in two schools around Seattle a day. But in the fall, we’ll travel all over the place. So, there’s kind of two versions of what that could look like. We could be waking up in the morning, having breakfast, getting to school for an 8 or 9 a.m. assembly. Sometimes we have to drive an hour, two hours to an assembly — we’ve driven three hours to one before, waking up at 5 a.m. and driving to a teeny, small farm town at 8 a.m.
We get there for the morning assemblies, a little over two hours long. Hopefully we have time to grab food and then take an afternoon assembly, and then we go back to the hotel and take a breather. A lot of the time we have work to do, so maybe we’ll go back to the hotel, check emails, do an interview, work on an initiative. Depending on where we are, we love exploring the cities we’re in. It’s a really unique sort of space, getting to travel into really cool towns, so we’ve gotten to see a ton of cool places that we might not have seen otherwise. I love food, it’s one of my passions, so I love being able to go online and find what the best dinner spot around is. Then, we wake up and repeat.
During the fall, it’s basically the same but we’re waking up for the morning assemblies, doing an afternoon assembly, getting on an airplane, flying to the next location, and then repeating. We’re kind of on for 24 hours a day.
Molly: When we’re not on tour, it looks very different. It kind of depends on what we’ve got going on, but a typical day involves a lot of emails…. Constant emails. Also, keeping up with whatever initiatives we may be working on, hopping on different calls, and maintaining and keeping everything up to date with our current initiatives. It’s definitely a little bit slower than tour life, and our time to assess current needs with Kind Campaign while we gear up for the next tour.
What is your favorite part about what you do?
Molly: Really, what drives us and inspires us and is really my favorite thing about we do is just all of the girls that we’re able to reach through our assemblies, curriculum, through our programs. Thinking about all of the girls that Kind Campaign has impacted and having the opportunity to reach these girls, hear their stories, and tell them how Kind Campaign has affected them is so special. We are in a unique situation, getting to go into these schools, and we’re so in it a lot of the times.
When I look back, and realize the numbers of the outreach that Kind Campaign has had, it continues to drive us and reignites our fire to get back out on the road. It’s crazy. The two of us have personally spoken in about 450 schools throughout North America and England, and Kind Campaign assemblies take place almost every day of the school year, so there’s been about 1,500 assemblies that have taken place. Just thinking of that impact is just kind of overwhelming, and makes me tear up, thinking of this around the globe.
What is the advice you would give to someone in college or just coming out of it?
Lauren: One of my favorite quotes in the entire world is by Howard Thurman, and it says, “Don’t ask what the world needs. Ask what makes you come alive, and go do it, because what the world needs is people who have come alive.”
I just love that quote so much, and I think it’s such a great piece of advice. Do whatever makes your heart come alive, whatever that looks like. A lot of people have conversations with us, and they say that they wish they were giving back, or they need to be doing something like Kind Campaign. But no. Everyone has something that they need to be doing, and if everyone was doing the same thing, the world would be boring. Do whatever it is that makes you feel passionate and alive, pursue it fiercely, and don’t take no for an answer. Listen to your heart. Do whatever that thing is that’s grabbing at you.
Molly: Don’t be discouraged when there are roadblocks, because roadblocks are inevitable. It’s more how you work through those, and ensuring that you don’t let those roadblocks halt you or stop you from doing whatever it is. Let those roadblocks be kind of a driving force, let them fuel your fire, and you’ll learn so much about yourself and the work you’re doing.
Susannah Hutcheson is a 2017 Texas A&M graduate and a USA TODAY College digital producer. Follow her on Twitter: @susiebhutch
