USA TODAY NETWORK Releases Season Two of “VRtually There”
CONNECTTWEET 22 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
USA TODAY NETWORK today released new episodes of its highly successful franchise, “VRtually There,” the industry’s first branded news experience presented in virtual reality (VR). Launched in October 2016, “VRtually There” continues to demonstrate USA TODAY NETWORK’s ongoing commitment to innovative and pioneering work in VR by pushing the boundaries in immersive storytelling and technology.
In season two, new segments will be rolled out each Tuesday. Over the course of the season, viewers will be provided with immersive, first-hand experiences, ranging from wild adventure, extreme nature and sport fantasies to iconic America and behind the scenes with VIP access.
“With over ten million views of ‘VRtually There,’ we are bringing together amazing advances in VR technology and an even higher ambition to tell the most gripping stories and bring new experiences to our audience in VR,” said David Hamlin, Executive Producer of “VRtually There.” “We are focused on five content areas that we know our audience enjoyed based on prior performance, and are even more unique and thrilling for viewers.”
In its first week, the show will take viewers hang gliding in Hawaii, on a last ride with the beloved Goodyear Blimp that’s retiring after almost 50 years, and an upclose encounter with giant elephant seals in Año Nuevo State Park, CA with researchers from UC Santa Cruz.
The new season of “VRtually There” follows USA TODAY NETWORK’s impactful work in virtual reality and further moves the needle forward on innovation in storytelling. In early 2017, the NETWORK produced its first special feature presentation of “VRtually There” and its first ever VR livestream of the 45th Presidential Inauguration, which received millions of views across its distribution channels.
You can view the new episodes here, on the USA TODAY app, YouTube app, Google Play store, Daydream, and YouTube.com/vrtuallythere. Season two of “VRtually There” will run from May 9th through July 2017.
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2q00FX2
