A look at how campuses across the country are celebrating Earth Month
Earth Day
Corrections and clarifications: A previous version of this article misidentified the sponsor of the ‘Just Eat It: A Food Waste Story’ film screening.
The arrival of April marks the start of Earth Month, which is now in its 46th year.
While the nationally recognized, month-long celebration is enjoyed by people of all ages, college students in particular are spearheading movements to make our country more environmentally conscious. Here’s how 10 schools across the country are promoting sustainability this Earth Month.
Ohio University
In recognition of Earth Day, Ohio University will host a ceremony April 20 during which awards for Staff Sustainability Advocate, Student Sustainability Leader and the Exemplary Sustainable Department, among others, will be handed out.
Students like Ashley Snow, a junior, believe in the importance of a sustainable lifestyle. Snow says celebrating Earth Month helps her to better “appreciate the things that the planet Earth has to offer” and take “a little bit of time to think about ways to make it a better, cleaner, healthier and safer place to live.”
“Part of that includes being eco-friendly and having an individual awareness of your part as a human in the ecosystem,” Snow says.
Michigan State University
MSU’s Sustainability Department and the Sustainable Spartans, a student organization focused on environmental consciousness, will co-host an Earth Week Extravaganza on April 21.
The day-long, on-campus event will feature giveaways and have activities such as flower pot decorating. Students are also encouraged to spread the word about Earth Month and challenge their peers to be eco-friendlier by using the hashtag #BeSpartanGreen.
University of Delaware
Over the course of the month, this university will host a number of events in honor of Earth Month, including movie screenings of films like An Inconvenient Truth, a free Arctic Skate Night where students wear glow-in-the-dark skate gear and a panel on environmentally friendly career paths.
Michelle Bennett, the school’s sustainability manager, tells USA TODAY College that the schools aims to raise awareness and promote an environmentally-conscious lifestyle.
“We want to showcase how sustainability is bigger than recycling and planting trees,” she says.
Kent State University
Students at the Ohio school will commemorate Earth Month by planting trees for Arbor Day, which is the last Friday of April. This is the eighth year that the school has earned the Arbor Day Foundation’s Tree Campus USA designation, which recognizes proper care of campus trees and student involvement in forestry.
On Earth Day (April 22), the university will use a solar-powered projector to screen films about sustainability and the environment for its 10th annual Who’s Your Mama? Environmental Film Fest.
Georgetown University
A number of sustainable practices — like litter cleanup and climate change solutions — will be addressed this April by the university. And like MSU, Georgetown is using hashtags to promote its Earth Month efforts: #HoyaGreen and #EarthDay2016.
Events on campus include a farmer’s market (which is also open in September, October and March) and a clothes drive, among others. The university has also advertised a number of local events that may be of interest to students, like when the Food Recovery Network sponsored a special screening of the documentary film Just Eat It: A Food Waste Story on April 3.
Audrey Stewart, the school’s sustainability director, says that engaging in Earth Month “events which celebrate, reflect on and serve our common home is one of the many ways we demonstrate our university-wide commitment to the environment and sustainability, and is part of our broader effort across the university to create real-world solutions to critical environmental challenges.”
North Carolina State University
North Carolina State boasts one of the more extensive collegiate Earth Month calendars with almost 40 scheduled events in April. Among these are an Earth Month Tunnel Painting in which the campus’s Free Expression Tunnel will be colored green, a bike ride to collect litter and a food safety workshop.
Carla Davis, the communications coordinator for the university’s Sustainability Office, says these activities allow students and faculty to work together toward a common cause.
“Events on our Earth Month calendar feature many topics and are hosted by a variety of student organizations and university departments, demonstrating that sustainability captures campus-wide interest,” she says.
The University of Oklahoma
The University of Oklahoma plans to highlight the current issues concerning water in our country during Earth Month this year.
Along with hosting a sustainability symposium, faculty members and Sandra Turner-Handy, director of community outreach for the Michigan Environmental Council, will discuss the Flint water crisis and its connection with social justice. OU will also and host a traveling exhibit on how Oklahoma water is protected from March 29 through May 4.
David Hambright, a biology professor and director of Environmental Studies, says OU hopes “to heighten awareness … while providing crucial information to the public and student body.”
“As a faculty member in the environmental arena, I am extremely pleased with the university’s dedication to building on its incredible current strengths in environmental research and education,” he says.
Harvard University
Harvard will promote Earth Month on campus with the hashtag #GreenHarvard this April. The school also plans to host musician and author Questlove as a special guest for an event titled “sometofoodabout,” which will take place on April 19. His talk will focus on the role food plays in our lives and also feature special guests like world-renowned Chef Ludo Lefebvre.
Emory University
Emory plans to celebrate Earth Month by hosting a festival with a scavenger hunt, s’mores and games.
Also among the university’s scheduled Earth Month events is a tour of the Emory WaterHub, a facility that uses biomimicry to clean water, according to the university’s Earth Month website.
Ciannat M. Howett, the school’s director of Sustainability Initiatives, says celebrating Earth Day is a long-standing school tradition.
“[We’ve] celebrated Earth Month since the first Earth Day in 1970 when the student newspaper … was printed with green ink,” Howett says. “Community members celebrate our shared values of stewardship and care for our planet and all of its inhabitants.”
Knox College
The Illinois college will honor Earth Month this April by hosting a variety of workshops for students, including one on how to create a terranium, how to make soap and how to grow micro-greens like arugula, cilantro and basil. The school aims to encourage sustainability and going green on campus.
On April 23, the school will also host a charity 5k run and walk, donating all funds raised to Trees4Galesburg, a non-profit organization that plants trees in the nearby town of Galesburg, Ill.
Greta Bjornson is a University of Vermont student and a USA TODAY College correspondent.
