Poll: Majority of voters say Trump is intelligent but he's not level-headed
CLOSE

 The 25th amendment allows for a sitting president to be removed from office - and it’s news to President Trump! Buzz60
Is President Trump intelligent? A majority of American voters believe he is — but that doesn't mean a majority believe he's level-headed, according to a new poll out Wednesday.
The Quinnipiac University National Poll found that 53% believe the president is intelligent, compared to 44% who believe he is not. That's part of an overall downward trend over the past year, according to Quinnipiac. In January 2017, prior to his inauguration, 68% of voters said the president was intelligent, while 27% said he was not.

Further, 69% of voters said they didn't believe the president was level-headed, while 28% said he was. The number of voters saying they didn't think the president was level-headed was up from January 2017, when 62% said they didn't think the president was level-headed and 33% said he was.
The new numbers were released days after the president proclaimed that he was intelligent, in the wake of a new tell-all book that claimed aides were unsure of his mental capacities. The White House has disavowed the book.
"Actually, throughout my life, my two greatest assets have been mental stability and being, like, really smart," Trump tweeted on Saturday, the day after the book, Fire and Fury, was released. He also said he was a "very stable genius."
....Actually, throughout my life, my two greatest assets have been mental stability and being, like, really smart. Crooked Hillary Clinton also played these cards very hard and, as everyone knows, went down in flames. I went from VERY successful businessman, to top T.V. Star.....
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 6, 2018
....to President of the United States (on my first try). I think that would qualify as not smart, but genius....and a very stable genius at that!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 6, 2018
The poll also asked voters to grade the president's first year in office:
39% gave him an F
17% gave him a D
16% gave him an A
16% gave him a B
11% gave him a C
"It's been a very tough freshman year for President Donald Trump, by any measure," Tim Malloy, the poll's assistant director, said in a statement. "Considered an intelligent person with a really bad report card, filled with far more F's than A's or B's, the president is a long way from the dean's list in the eyes of voters."
Quinnipiac surveyed 1,106 voters around the country from Jan. 5-9. The poll has an error margin of 3.6 points.
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2mixXNg
