The conversation changed after 'Baltimore uprising': Your Say
Letter to the editor: 
You didn’t have to know Freddie Gray personally to be influenced by the events that transpired after his death in Baltimore. It's been two years since Gray died while in police custody and triggered a series of events — most notably, the burning of a CVS store — that would later be dubbed as the "Baltimore uprising." Looking back over the last two years, I often ask myself, did the death of Gray and the subsequent uprising change anything?
The temptation to say yes is overwhelming. You don't want to think that everything that transpired in Baltimore was in vain. But if you look closer the amount of pain and heartbreak left behind, what you'll find is a sobering reality.
Our new mayor, Catherine Pugh, and Police Commissioner Kevin Davis have voiced their support for police reform, asking a federal judge not to delay the signing of a consent decree — after U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions had requested it. The review of Gray’s arrest and death are both still open cases, even though not one of the six officers involved was convicted of a crime. Still, the numerous reports and investigations that are complete continue to unearth the silenced issues many people here have experienced. These reports only show how little has changed here in Baltimore.
Those who saw the Baltimore uprising as an inconvenience like to highlight the fact that Baltimore has seen over 300 homicides each of the last two years. But that only underscores the need for change in our broken system.
Related content: 
Freddie Gray experienced a childhood that far too many young people experience growing up in Baltimore. He and his siblings grew up with parents who had a history of substance abuse, in a public housing project under living conditions that could compare to those in third-world countries. Like many in this city Gray was no stranger to violence, , and like so many today, Gray never had the chance to overcome those things.
The uprising wasn’t just about Gray's death or police brutality. People were and still are upset that it’s easier to find opioids rather than opportunity here. And though most people have returned to their regular lives, we all paused and reflected about how comfortable we’ve all grown with people living in such conditions.
Which is why when people ask me, “What has changed in Baltimore since Freddie Gray’s death sparked a resistance movement?” I tell them, the conversation has changed. The community has changed. But I also tell them that the city hasn’t. The tone of the conversation from public officials offers hope, but the realization that we are losing more lives than ever in Baltimore is a harsh reminder that change is a slow process, and that sometimes there will bet setbacks before we can move forward.
We have to find a solution to the issues that are impacting us today, or else we will lose an entire generation of young people to the same conditions we lost Freddie Gray.
Kwame Rose; Baltimore
Rose is an activist in Baltimore and founder of Black EXCELLence. You can follow him on Twitter @kwamerose.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2qg0yUE
