Presidential health: Here’s what we know about health of Obama, Bush and Clinton
15 Shares 




President Trump's physician has declared that the commander-in-chief is in "excellent health."
It's not quite to the "healthiest individual ever elected to the presidency" level — something Trump's personal doctor declared during the 2016 presidential campaign — but it's a description that has often been used during previous administrations and does indicate that the president is fit to serve.
So how does that compare to past presidents? Let's take a look back.
Barack Obama
Over the course of Obama's eight years in office, his physical reports pointed to one thing: Obama was healthy and enjoyed "all the benefits of good health." The reports listed Obama's vitals, as well as his lab results and previous medical history. 
"The president continues to focus on healthy lifestyle choices," Dr. Ronny Jackson, the physician to the president, wrote in 2016. "He eats a healthy diet, remains tobacco free and only drinks alcohol occasionally and in moderation. He continues to exercise daily with a focus on aerobic fitness and resistance weight training."
George W. Bush
Per a 2001 physical Bush underwent in the first year of his presidency, he was in "outstanding health and fit for duty."
In addition to listing his vitals and other key information, the report notes Bush's previous activity- and sports-related injuries and surgeries. It also noted that Bush had the "occasional cigar" and didn't drink alcohol.
"The President is in the top 2% of men his age in cardiovascular fitness," the report reads. "This fitness level would place him in the Excellent category for men 40-44 and Superior range for men 45 and older. He is stratified to a very low coronary risk profile."
Bill Clinton
Clinton's health was an ongoing subject throughout his campaign and presidency.
During the 1992 campaign, his doctors told journalists that Clinton was in excellent health, but noted that he had allergies, mild hearing loss, chronic laryngitis and needed to lose weight.
By 1997, Clinton was fitted with a hearing aid. His weight, cholesterol levels and blood pressure fluctuated throughout his presidency. By the end of his time in office, his physician had given him a prescription to lower his cholesterol and he had a lesion removed from his back.
Clinton himself noted that it was important for the public to know about his health, though.
"The public has a right to know the condition of the president's health," he said in 1996.
George H.W. Bush
According to a 1989 physical, Bush was in "extremely sound physical condition."
He underwent the typical physical examination that indicated he had mild osteoarthritis, but no other significant changes to his health. He also had a cyst drained.
"He keeps fit through a number of physical activities, which we recommend he continue on a regular basis," his doctor said at the time. "Today's examination shows him to be in excellent health."
Ronald Reagan
Reagan underwent a number of physicals throughout his presidency. In his first in 1981, the report noted that he was in "excellent health" and had recovered from the gunshot wounds he suffered during an assassination attempt earlier in the year.
By 1985, his doctor was positive about both Reagan's physical and mental health.
"President Reagan continues to enjoy good health," the physician said. "His overall physical and mental condition is excellent."
That same year, Reagan underwent three surgeries. During the first, he had a polyp removed from his colon. He had a second polyp — discovered during the first surgery — later removed, and that polyp was found to be cancerous.
The White House provided regular updates on his health, including one note from his doctors: "He is fast returning to championship form."
In 1987, he also a basal cell epithelioma removed from his nose, and in 1989, he had voluntary surgery on his hand.



Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2DjyXLX
