Duchess Kate is respectful and stylish on Poland visit
Dressing for such a somber visit is a challenge, but the Duchess of Cambridge was conservative in an Erdem top and matching skirt.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 3 Shares 




Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this post misidentified in the headline and story Web address (URL) the concentration camp visited by the royal family.
When the eyes of the world are upon you, deciding what to wear to a concentration camp can be a dicey business. Just ask former Vice President Dick Cheney, who was called out for wearing a parka to a memorial event at Auschwitz in 2005.
Duchess Kate fared better, choosing a two-piece Erdem suit with a subtle, floral print while visiting Stutthof, a former Nazi concentration camp, with Prince William Tuesday during their tour of Poland. 

The white two-piece look by designer Erdem featured a top and skirt with subdued colors in the print, including gray and a faded red. 
The one risk she took? Her high-heeled beige sandals.
The royals kicked off their goodwill trip in Poland yesterday. The duchess stepped off the plane in a white two-piece look by Alexander McQueen, and later wore another white look: a sleeveless dress by designer Gosia Baczynska. 

 Duchess Kate opted for a casual chic ensemble when visiting the Bond Primary School in London on Jan. 17, 2018. Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP
 Duchess Kate is back at work for the first time in 2018. On Wednesday, Jan. 10, she paid a visit to Reach Academy in West London, which partners with Place2Be, a children's mental health charity and one of her royal patronages. WILL OLIVER, EPA-EFE
 Duchess Kate's third pregnancy is beginning to show more, under her red-and-green tartan plaid coat by Miu Miu as she walks with Prince William (that's his cousin, Lady Louise Windsor in front) to attend Christmas Day service at St Mary Magdalene on Dec. 25, 2017 at Sandringham. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 After the service, Duchess Kate and royal bride-to-be Meghan Markle stood with Prince William and Prince Harry in front of other members of the royal family as they wait to see off Queen Elizabeth II after attending the traditional Christmas Day service at St Mary Magdalene Church at Sandringham. ADRIAN DENNIS, AFP/Getty Images
 Merry Christmas from Prince William, Duchess Kate and their children, Prince George and Princess Charlotte. The picture for their holiday card was taken at Kensington Palace. Kate is wearing her blue Catherine Walker skirt suit for the picture. Chris Jackson/Getty Images/ Kensington Palace
 Duchess Kate attended a Christmas party at the 'Magic Mums' community at the Rugby Portobello Trust, part of a network of centers that run programs for children and parents in local communities, on Dec. 12, 2017 in London. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate and Prince William spoke to school children taking part in a 'Stepping Out' session at the BBC in Manchester on Dec. 6, 2017. The session is a focus group where kids give the BBC their views on new programs in production. OLI SCARFF, AFP/Getty Images
 The school Duchess Kate visited, Robin Hood Primary School in London, has developed an outdoor learning curriculum with support from the Royal Horticultural Society Campaign for School Gardening. In her speech at the school, Kate said she has fond memories of her own adventures in gardening that she is sharing with her children, Prince George and Princess Charlotte. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 Duchess Kate wore a diamond-print Kate Spade dress with a long flowing skirt for her visit to The Foundling Museum. In what may be a first, she approached the press pack at the event to declare her happiness at the news that brother-in-law Prince Harry will marry American actress Meghan Markle at Windsor Castle next May. "William and I are absolutely thrilled. It’s such exciting news. It’s a really happy time for any couple and we wish them all the best and hope they enjoy this happy moment,” she said as video cameras whirred. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 Only two days after trying her hand at off-road driving in Birmingham, Duchess Kate was dressed up and glittering at the annual Royal Variety Performance at the Palladium Theatre in London on Nov. 24, 2017. The show, which raises money for entertainers in old age, was delayed a bit after a security scare at the Oxford Circus subway station closest to the theater. EDDIE MULHOLLAND, AFP/Getty Images
 The audience got a glimpse of Duchess Kate's slight baby bump when she took her seat in the royal box and dropped her hands and clutch to her side, at the Royal Variety Performance at the Palladium Theatre in London on Nov. 24, 2017. EDDIE MULHOLLAND, AFP/Getty Images
 Certain precautions were necessary while visiting the Acme Whistles factory in Birmingham, where Duchess Kate and Prince William learned about the 147-year-old company and creator of the first police whistle. Thefamily-ownedfirmnow supplies modern whistles for police and major sporting events around the world. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate of Cambridge visited the Hornsey Road Children's Centre in London, Nov. 14, 2017, to check out some of the family support services the mental-health charity offers, including pre-natal and post-natal services for moms, a nursery and play groups. Kirsty Wigglesworth, AP
 Duchess Kate wore a cream-colored, A-shaped Redgrave coat by GOAT, one of her favorite brands. She wore it in 2013 when she was pregnant with Prince George. Under it, she appeared to be wearing a black dress with white collar by Topshop, plus black tights and black suede boots. Samir Hussein/WireImage
 Duchess Kate is flanked by Sophie Countess of Wessex, wife of the queen's youngest son, Prince Edward, and Princess Alexandra, a cousin of the queen, on the balcony for the Remembrance Sunday memorial service on Nov. 12, 2017. Kate wore a black wool double-breasted coat by Dolce & Gabbana. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate of Cambridge turned out the night before Remembrance Sunday for the annual Royal Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall in London on Nov. 11, 2017, Armistice Day. The Queen, accompanied by His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh and other members of the Royal Family attended the annual Royal Festival of Remembrance at the Royal Albert Hall. The anniversary of Armistice Day, November 11, 1918, is marked in Britain with a number of events and acts of remembrance to honour those who fell in the two World Wars and subsequent conflicts. The red poppy is worn to symbolise the poppies which grew on French and Belgian battlefields during World War I. / AFP PHOTO / POOL / Stefan RousseauSTEFAN ROUSSEAU/AFP/Getty Images ORIG FILE ID: AFP_U713X STEFAN ROUSSEAU, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate sat next to Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip in Albert Hall for the annual Royal Festival of Remembrance. Kate wore a black silk-and-velvet coat with Swarovski buttons by Catherine Walker, which complemented the black silk-and-velvet dress the queen wore. STEFAN ROUSSEAU, AFP/Getty Images
 Kate holds tennis racket close to her heart at a "Tennis for Kids" session during her visit to the National Tennis Centre in London on Oct. 31, 2017. She is the patron of the Lawn Tennis Association, the governing body of lawn tennis in Britain. Daniel Leal-Olivas, WPA Pool, Getty Images
 Her Philosophy Di Lorenzo Serafini jacket served as a pop of color for her otherwise monochromatic ensemble of black turtleneck, skinny jeans and velvet boots. It was reminiscent of a similar look for a visit to a Royal Air Force base earlier this year. Only then, the blazer was red. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 The duchess wore Prada: Duchess Kate of Cambridge joined Prince William and Prince Harry on Aug. 30, 2017, to tour the memorial White Garden at Kensington Palace, dedicated to the princes' late mother, Princess Diana, on the eve of the 20th anniversary of her death. Kate wore a green poppy-patterned dress by Prada that Diana herself would have loved in the 1980s. Samir Hussein, Samir Hussein/WireImage
 What's a little rain? Duchess Kate sported an umbrella and a wide smile to tour the memorial White Garden dedicated to Princess Diana with husband Prince William and his brother Prince Harry on Aug. 30, 2017, a day before the 20th anniversary of her death. Kirsty Wigglesworth, AP
 With her husband, Prince William, left, Duchess Kate spoke with Commonwealth War Graves Commission Director General Victoria Wallace during a visit to the Commonwealth War Graves Bedford House on the outskirts of Ypres on July 31, 2017. AURORE BELLOT, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate chose a maxi-dress by a German designer, Markus Lupfer, featuring a dramatic bird pattern on a teal background, for the reception at the Claerchens Ballhaus dance hall in Berlin, on their second day in Germany. It was her third change of clothes during an eventful day. JENS KALAENE, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate's arrival in the royal box at Wimbledon on July 16, 2017, gives onlookers a good look at her Catherine Walker white floral dress, with the little black bow on her left lapel, plus a white bag. Clive Brunskill, Getty Images
 LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM - JULY 12: (EMBARGOED FOR PUBLICATION IN UK NEWSPAPERS UNTIL 48 HOURS AFTER CREATE DATE AND TIME) Prince William, Duke of Cambridge and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge attend a State Banquet at Buckingham Palace on day 1 of the Spanish State Visit on July 12, 2017 in London, England. This is the first state visit by the current King Felipe and Queen Letizia, the last being in 1986 with King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia. (Photo by Max Mumby/Indigo/Getty Images) Licensed for 1-time use on for Pricness Kate blog post on 7/13/17. Additional use requires re-licensing ORG XMIT: 775003348 [Via MerlinFTP Drop] Max Mumby/Indigo, Getty Images
 Kate turned up in the royal box for one of her favorite sporting events, Wimbledon tennis. She attended day one of the championship at The All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club on July 3, 2017 in London. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 Duchess Kate lit up the first day of Royal Ascot in a white lace dress by Alexander McQueen and matching hat. Royal Ascot, which kicked off June 20, is the biggest event in British horse racing, beloved especially by Queen Elizabeth II, who also attended with other royal relations. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Kate met with kids during a lesson focused on plastic in the sea at the charity's final Land Rover BAR Roadshow at the Docklands Sailing and Watersports Centre in London, June 16, 2017. The roadshow uses the inspiration of Sir Ben Ainslies British Americas Cup challenge to inspire both primary and secondary school pupils into science, technology, engineering and math. FRANK AUGSTEIN, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate talked with hospital staff at King's College Hospital and sat down with Clinical Director and Consultant in Emergency Medicine, Dr Malcolm Tunnicliff, in London on June 12, 2017, during a visit with those affected by the attacks in London Bridge and Borough Market on June 3. Dominic Lipinski, AP
 Duchess Kate arrived at Kings College Hospital in a textured navy skirt suit to meet staff and patients who were affected by the terrorist attacks in London Bridge and Borough Market on June 12, 2017 in London. WPA Pool, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate wore an appropriate dress - dark green with white flowers by Rochas -to the Chelsea Flower Show on May 22, 2017 in London.The prestigious garden extravaganza has been held annually since 1913 in the Royal Hospital Chelsea grounds. WPA Pool, Getty Images
 Bring out the hats - it's the start of royal garden party season in London. Duchess Kate was among the royals, led by Queen Elizabeth II, to appear among thousands of guests in the back garden of Buckingham Palace on May 16, 2017. VICTORIA JONES, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate, in blue silk satin Christopher Kane coatdress, and Prince William, in morning coat and top hat, stand with the queen, her daughter, Princess Anne the Princess Royal, her husband, Prince Philip Duke of Edinburgh, and her granddaughter, Princess Beatrice of York, as the national anthem plays at a garden party at Buckingham Palace. VICTORIA JONES, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate of Cambridge went to Luxembourg for the day on May 11, 2017, to represent Britain in the commemoration of the 150th anniversary of the 1867 Treaty of London (which settled the status of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg), and celebrate ties between the tiny duchy and the U.K. She was scheduled to visit a modern art museum, tour a cycling festival, take in the local scenery and meet with the local royals, Grand Duke Henri and Grand Duchess Maria Teresa and their family at the Grand Ducal Palace. JOHN THYS, AFP/Getty Images
 Luxembourg's royals were front and center during the Duchess of Cambridge's visit. Prince Guillaume (R), the heir to the duchy, and his wife, Princess Stephanie, flank Kate as they take part in the commemoration of the 150th anniversary of the 1867 Treaty of London in Luxembourg, on May 11, 2017. Luxembourg's Prime Minister Xavier Bettel is at far left. JOHN THYS, AFP/Getty Images
 The Duchess of Cambridge views a cake with a cycling design as she tours a cycling-themed festival and unveiled a mural of British cyclist Tom Simpson and Luxembourgish cycling legend Charly Gaul at Place de Clairfontaine in Luxembourg. Jeff Spicer, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate ventured to Farms for City Children on May 3, 2017 in Arlingham, Gloucestershire. The charity gives children living in the UK a chance to reside and work on a farm for a week. She was beaming as she fed a lamb. NEIL MUNNS, EPA
 William, Kate and Harry talked about the importance of mental health counseling and conversations in a film shot in the garden of Kensington Palace in London, April 19, 2017, and released on social media. The film is part of their Heads Together campaign's film series aimed at helping to de-stigmatize talking about mental health awareness. KENSINGTON PALACE
 Duchess Kate made several appearances in the week leading up to the 2017 London Marathon, including on April 19 when she hosted a reception for runners from Team Heads Together at Kensington Palace. She wore one of her favorite casual looks, leggings and a striped top. CHRIS JACKSON, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate had a theater night in London on April 4, 2017. She attended the opening night of the musical '42nd Street,' a revival of the 1980 Broadway show. The event was a fundraiser for the East Anglia Children's Hospice, for which she is the royal patron. FACUNDO ARRIZABALAGA, EPA
 Art lover and royal patron Duchess Kate attended the 2017 Portrait Gala at the National Portrait Gallery in London on March 28, 2017. The 2017 Gala is fundraising for Coming Home, a project to make it possible for portraits of iconic individuals to return to places that are special to them for a loan period of over three years. Kate toured some of the newest exhibits at the gallery. NEIL HALL, AFP/Getty Images
 In addition to the engagement at the National Portrait Gallery, there was other news about Duchess Kate on March 28: Kensington Palace announced she would visit, at the request of the foreign office, Luxembourg on May 11 for the commemoration of the 1867 Treaty of London confirming Luxembourg’s independence. It's only her second solo foreign engagement and is considered part of the royal family's "Brexit" tour of Europe as Britain gets ready to initiate divorce proceedings from the European Union. Samir Hussein, WireImage
 Despite a shocking terror attack in the heart of central London, Duchess Kate carried on with her scheduled engagement the next day, March 23, 2017, when she visited the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists to attend the launch of maternal mental-health films produced by one of her charities. Samir Hussein/WireImage
 Duchess Kate visits the Ronald McDonald House in London on Feb. 28. For the occasion she chose a fringed blue suit with silver threading by Rebecca Taylor, and her hair pulled back in a half-bun with long, flowing curls. ANDY RAIN, EPA
 As usual, lots of flowers for Duchess Kate on her visit to an Action for Children project caring for disadvantaged children in Torfaen, south Wales, on Feb. 22, 2017. This was her first engagement since becoming royal patron in December. GEOFF CADDICK, EPA
 Kate chose her burgundy suit with the flirty skirt hem by Paule Ka, with black boots and turtleneck. She's worn the French designer's outfits before, and may do so when she and Prince William pay an official visit to Paris in March. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Her outfit was elegant, but practical. For one thing, there was no danger of skirts being blown around while standing on runways. Plus, those low-heeled boots are a lot more amenable to climbing in and out of small planes than her customary pumps. Stephen Pond, Getty Images
 Despite the bitter cold, Duchess Kate went bare-shoulders in a glamorous Alexander McQueen gown at the British Academy Film Awards (BAFTA) at Royal Albert Hall on Feb. 12, 2017 in London. Her chestnut locks were swept back in a low chignon and some pretty pink statement earrings, possibly diamonds, dangled from her ears. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Continuing to campaign for mental health awareness, Duchess Kate and Prince William attended a conference of health writers in London, where William gave a speech urging that mental health issues be treated with the same respect as physical health issues. WPA Pool, Getty Images
 For the first time in public, Kate wore an Oscar de la Renta outfit, adding to the late designer's status after Ivanka Trump donned him during her father's inauguration. Kate's skirt suit was in a vibrant mulberry color and featured a jacket with a peplum waist and a full skirt with box pleats. Eddie Mulholland, AP
 The young royals showed off their sporty sides on Feb. 5 during a training event for the 2017 Virgin Money London Marathon to promote their mental health awareness charity Heads Together, at Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in London. ALASTAIR GRANT, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate wears a green jacket and matching pencil skirt by Hobbs during her visit to East Anglia's Children's Hospices on Jan. 24, 2017 in Quidenham, Norfolk. The princess was also updated on the organization's nook appeal, which she helped launch in 2014. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 Duchess Kate arrives at the Institute of Contemporary Art in London on Jan. 17, 2017, to help the mental health destigmatization campaign launched with Prince William and Prince Harry. The trio gave speeches but lots of eyes were on Kate's extra-voluminous hair style. Yui Mok, AP
 Duchess Kate, fresh off the holidays and her 35th birthday, went back to work Wednesday, Jan. 11, 2017. She stepped out in a royal blue, 1950s-inspired coat by British label Eponine for a visit to the Anna Freud Center for Children and Families. Tristan Fewings, Getty Images
 Will and Kate joined the queen and royal family, plus Kate's parents, sister and brother, in walking to church from Sandringham for Sunday services on Jan. 8, 2017. Kate chose her Sportsmax olive green coat topped with a cozy warm grey fur hat. GERRY PENNY, EPA
 The royal family gathered to pose before the annual Diplomatic Reception at Buckingham Palace on Dec. 8, 2016. The dress code is white tie and tiaras and the royal men who are members of the Order of the Garter wear their garters. (L-R) Camilla Duchess of Cornwall, Prince Charles, Queen Elizabeth II, Prince Philip, Prince William, and Duchess Kate of Cambridge. She recycled the sparkling cap-sleeve Jenny Packham scarlet gown she wore to the Chinese state banquet last year, but chose a different tiara, the Cambridge Lover's Knot Tiara. Dominic Lipinski, WPA Pool/Getty Images
 Will and Kate attended the memorial service for the late Duke of Westminster, a close friend of the royal family, in Chester Cathedral in Chester, England, on Nov. 28, 2016. Naturally, Kate was in black, in an Alexander McQueen double-breasted wool coat with velvet trim. Nigel Roddis, Getty Images
 The Duke of Westminster, the late Gerald Grosvenor, is survived by one son and three daughters, one of whom, Lady Tamara van Cutsem, is married to one of Prince William's closest friends. The duke died of a heart attack in August 2016. he was 64. Nigel Roddis, Getty Images
 Kate's dress for the Place2Be Wellbeing in Schools Awards was the Preen Finella midi-dress in black with an asymmetrical neckline and a crystal-embellished belt at the waist. If it looks familiar, that's because she wore a scarlet version of the same dress during her recent tour of western Canada. Eamonn M. McCormack, AP
 Duchess Kate went to the Natural History Museum (she's the royal patron) in London on Nov. 22, 2016, to attend a children's tea party to celebrate Dippy the Diplodocus, the dino skeleton set to tour the UK to inspire kids' interest in natural history. Here, she makes a dinosaur egg with pupils from Oakington Manor Primary School. YUI MOK, AFP/Getty Images
 Kate at the annual Remembrance Sunday Service at the Cenotaph on Whitehall on Nov. 13, 2016 in London, to honor British war dead. She and other royal women watched the ceremony from the balcony of the Foreign Office. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 Will and Kate arrive at Royal Albert Hall for the annual Royal Festival of Remembrance in London on Nov.12, 2016, to mark anniversaries of the Battle of the Somme, the Battle of Jutland, the Gulf War and the first flight of the Supermarine Spitfire. VICTORIA JONES, AFP/Getty Images
 You can better see Kate's Dolce & Gabbana boucle wool skirt, with button fastenings and a yarn fringe detail, as she unveils a plaque at the Nelson center. She's also got on a poppy pin, as so many do during November, in memory of British war dead. RICHARD POHLE, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate went to the Netherlands on Oct. 11, 2016, in her first solo overseas engagement. She visited The Hague to see an exhibit of Vermeer from British collections at the Mauritshuis Gallery, met with Dutch King Willem-Alexander, and held meetings with charities about the young royals' ongoing mental health awareness campaign. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 King Willem-Alexander's wife, Queen Maxima, was in her home country of Argentina. The meeting of the future British queen and the Dutch king was the first between senior members of the two royal families in three years, as Kate joins in royal diplomacy in the wake of Britain's coming exit from the European Union. Pool, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate, along with Prince William and Prince Harry, are making a big push to de-stigmatize mental-mental health issues as part of their joint charity effort, Heads Together. They attended World Mental Health Day celebration at the London Eye on Oct. 10, 2016 in London. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 The second day of Will and Kate's trip to Cornwall and the nearby islands of Scilly started out delayed due to blustery weather making helicopter travel dicey. But the weather eventually cooperated and the two were off to St. Martins, one of the islands, with Kate looking very Hollywood in her sunglasses, on Sept. 2, 2016. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Not many royals wear pants on an official engagement but Kate always looks chic even in casual clothes, like these $30 Gap capris in a pretty blue and white pattern, topped with her Smythe navy blazer and the nude wedges she wore the day before. They were on a tour of the island of St. Martins on Sept. 2, 2016. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate can pull a pint like the best publican. Kate and Prince William are in Cornwall and nearby islands for two days of engagements to inspect local industries and charitable projects. Here, they sampled cider at Healey's Cornish Cider Farm near Truro on Sept. 1, 2016. Arthur Edwards, AFP/Getty Images
 The royal children, Prince George and Princess Charlotte, were not on the trip but Kate got to coo over a baby during a walkabout near Nansledan, a project aimed at providing future business and housing for locals. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 The Cambridges are still a romantic couple, cuddling a little during a visit to Towan Beach near Newquay in Cornwall.The far western edge of England is a romantic place, probably best known to Americans from 'Doc Martin' and 'Poldark' on public TV. Samir Hussein, WireImage
 Duchess Kate was delighted to visit the Wave Project on Newquay's Towan Beach, a charity that uses surfing to reduce anxiety in children and improve their mental health. wellbeing on September 1, 2016 in Newquay, United Kingdom. Their Royal Highnesses watched children from the project and their surf-mentors take part in a number of surfing activities, and met a selection of the charity's volunteers, staff and supporters on the beach. Arthur Edwards, WPA Pool, Getty Images
 Prince William and Duchess Kate were in Luton in Bedfordshire, England, on Aug. 24, 2016, for a day of engagements focused on young people and mental health, including a therapeutic program called Youthscape. The couple have several more engagements scheduled in coming weeks, before they leave for an eight-day tour of western Canada on Sept. 24, 2016. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Kate wore a favorite dress, the L.K Bennett Lasa white sheath with a flattering blue poppy print, last seen during the Cambridge 2014 tour of Australia. The Cambridges returned to carrying out official engagements after a private holiday in France with Prince George and Princess Charlotte. Samir Hussein, WireImage
 Kate is the patron of the 1851 Trust, which seeks to inspire a new generation through sailing and the marine industry. It's backed by Ben Ainslie Racing, the team hoping to win the America’s Cup for Britain. Both wore the official gear of Land Rover BAR team. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 Good thing Duchess Kate was a big fan of tennis before she married Prince William, because Wimbledon and royals are closely associated. Will and Kate were there for the final match between Andy Murray of Britain and Milos Raonic of Canada on July 10, 2016 in London. Andy Couldridge,Pool,Getty Images
 It's all about George. Duchess Kate and Prince William took their soon-to-be 3-year-old with them on a visit to a huge military airshow at an RAF base in Fairford, England, on July 8, 2016 - the little prince's first official engagement in the U.K. Usually, all eyes are on Kate but on this day George was the star as he explored the flying machines at The Royal International Air Tattoo at RAF Fairford. Samir Hussein, Samir Hussein/WireImage
 The Middleton family's love of Wimbledon continues. Duchess Kate attended day 10 on July 7, 2016, and looked delighted throughout as she sat in the royal box for the semi-final match between Venus Williams and Angelique Kerber of Germany. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 Kate recycled the yellow-and-white color-block Roksanda Ilincic dress she wore in 2014 during the Cambridge tour of Australia. At the time, she told a woman in the crowd that Prince William teased her that she "looked like a banana" in the dress. GLYN KIRK, AFP/Getty Images
 The art-loving Duchess Kate presented the Art Fund Museum of the Year prize at a dinner at the Natural History Museum on July 6, 2016 in London. The prize is awarded annually to one museum demonstrating exceptional imagination, innovation and achievement. Matt Dunham, Pool/Getty Images
 Peek-a-boo. Duchess Kate stands before art photographs at a reception ahead of presenting the Art Fund Museum of the Year prize at a dinner at the Natural History Museum on July 6, 2016 in London. She mingled with representatives of the five museums up for the prize, including the Victoria & Albert Museum, named for the royal ancestors of husband Prince William. WPA Pool, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate, Prince William, Prince Harry, Prince Charles and his wife Camilla Duchess of Cornwall joined European leaders for the 100th anniversary of the Battle of the Somme at the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing, on July 1, 2016, in Thiepval, France. Some 70,000 British and Commonwealth soldiers with no known grave are buried there. Phil Noble, Pool, Getty Images
 Kate's dress for the solemn occasion was a new knee-length frock of beige lace over black underlay with a Peter Pan collar, three-quarter length sleeves and peplum waist. She wore a hat she's worn before, by Sylvia Fletcher for Lock & Co. Chris Radburn, Pool, Getty Images
 Only days after the British voted to exit the European Union, formed in part to avoid future world wars, European leaders joined European royals to mark the centenary of the Battle of the Somme. French President Francois Hollande and outgoing Prime Minister David Cameron lined up with Prince William, Duchess Kate of Cambridge and Prince Harry to attend a service during the ceremonies on July 1, 2016 in Thiepval, France. Chris Radburn, Pool, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate, Prince William and Prince Harry attended the Battle of the Somme Centenary commemorations at the Thiepval Memorial, where 70,000 British and Commonwealth soldiers are commemorated, on June 30, 2016 in Albert, France. After a tour of the battlefield, one of the deadliest of WWI, the young royals attended an evening vigil at the memorial. Pool, Getty Images
 Duchess Kate seems to be taking to annual royal rituals with delight. On Sunday, she joined the family for The Patron's Lunch, a massive picnic for 10,000 on The Mall to mark the Queen's 90th birthday, on June 12, 2016 in London. Danny Martindale, WireImage
 (Prince William, Duchess Kate and Prince Harry traveled down The Mall in a car behind the queen and Prince Philip during the Patron's Lunch, as thousands of guests from the queen's charities lined the streets to cheer and wave flags. BRUCE ADAMS, AFP/Getty Images
 The picture of a happy family. Duchess Kate, Prince William and their two children, Princess Charlotte and Prince George, were part of the royal mob on the balcony of Buckingham Palace on June 11 for the traditional end of the Trooping the Colour parade. The two royal children managed to steal the spotlight even from great-granny Queen Elizabeth II, in neon green. Samir Hussein, WireImage
 During the Trooping the Colour parade pageant on June 11, Duchess Kate rode in a carriage with her stepmother-in-law, Duchess Camilla of Cornwall. This year the annual ceremony was special to mark the Queen's official 90th birthday. Ben A. Pruchnie, Getty Images
 Kate hosted SportsAid's 40th anniversary dinner in London on June 9, 2016, at Kensington Palace. As the royal patron of SportsAid, she met young athletes who will be competing in the Rio 2016 Olympics at a pre-dinner reception. EDDIE MULHOLLAND, AFP/Getty Images
 The garden party followed by a day Will and Kate's appearance at the world famous Chelsea Flower Show in London, on May 23, 2016. This year's theme focuses on health and happiness in the garden. Kate chose her grass-green coat dress by Catherine Walker for show. STR, EPA
 Dressed in wet weather gear, Kate gets help adjusting her safety helmet from Ben Ainslie, head of the British America's Cup team, before a trial runat Ainslie's sailing base in Portsmouth where Ainslie runs programs for young people to take up the sport. GERRY PENNY, EPA
 The Heads Together campaign is being spearheaded by the young royals' charitable foundation. Harry has just returned from another successful Invictus Games, in Orlando, and all three were at Windsor Castle on Sunday to help granny Queen Elizabeth II celebrate her 90th birthday with a horse-show extravaganza. Kirsty Wigglesworth, AP
 Kate sat next to Prince Philip during the final night of the queen's 90th birthday celebrations at Windsor on May 15, 2016. She had on a new white lace dress by Dolce & Gabbana under a bright red cape-like coat by Zara to ward off the evening chill. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 Kate has been patron of the National Portrait Gallery since her marriage and is also an avid photographer, especially of her children. The exhibit showcases the range of photography commissioned by British 'Vogue' since it was founded in 1916. IAN GAVAN, AFP/Getty Images
 Earlier on May 4, Duchess Kate channels another royal, Queen Daenerys Targaryen of 'Game of Thrones,' as she inspects a dragon sculpture Wednesday. It was part of a new children's exhibit called Magic Garden at Britain's Hampton Court Palace. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 Duchess Kate's May 4 schedule also included a luncheon at London's Anna Freud Centre. She is a patron of the organization, which is dedicated to children's mental health concerns. For this event, she doffed her coat to reveal her pale blue/grey Roksanda Ilincic dress that she has worn several times before. KIRSTY WIGGLESWORTH, AFP/Getty Images
 President Obama and first lady Michelle Obama joined Will and Kate and Harry for dinner at the Cambridge apartment at Kensington Palace on April 22, 2016. Although most of the attention rightly went to little Prince George, who got to stay up late and meet the Obamas in his bathrobe, the dinner was also historic because it was the first time the young royals hosted a visiting head of state on their own, just a few hours after granny Queen Elizabeth II hosted them for lunch at Windsor Castle. For this, Kate wore a cinched-waist midi-dress in a blue and purple-pink silk print by one of her favorite designers, L.K. Bennett. Mrs. O went with a nude midi-dress with a lace skirt and a cashmere sweater top, plus matching duster. STR/POOL, EPA
 Prince William, Duchess Kate and Prince Harry launched their new charity campaign called Heads Together which aims to destigmatize talking about mental health. She will focus on children, William will focus on young men an suicide, and Harry will focus on veterans. The latest effort by their joint charitable foundation has been named the 2017 Virgin Money London Marathon Charity of the Year. The trio posed at Kensington Palace on April 21, 2016 in London. Kate was casual for the announcement event in a JCrew striped sweater. Nicky J Sims, Getty Images for Royal Foundatio
 Kate's clothes during her tour of India and Bhutan are a subject for appraisal all their own but on the last day, April 16, 2016, at the Taj Mahal in Agra, she wore an India-inspired blue-and-white embroidered dress by Indian designer Naeem Khan. It reflected the care that she and her team employed in choosing outfits for the tour that acknowledged the hosts, the culture, the activities and the weather during the week they spent in the region. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 As the royal patron of East Anglia's Children's Hospices (EACH), Kate was the obvious choice to officially open the charity's new thrift shop in Holt, near her Norfolk home, on March 18, 2016. EACH supports families and cares for children and young people with life-threatening conditions across Cambridgeshire, Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk, England. ARTHUR EDWARDS, AFP/Getty Images
 Kate turned out with the rest of the royal family, led by Queen Elizabeth II, for the annual Commonwealth Day service at Westminster Abbey in London, March 14, 2016. The service is the largest annual inter-faith gathering in the U.K. Kirsty Wigglesworth, AP
 The tradition of royal ski trips continues. Only now, Will and Kate have managed to pull off a private (meaning secret) trip with their kids, Prince George and Princess Charlotte, in the French Alps the first week of March 2016. They brought along one photographer to snap a few photos of them playing in the snow, and introducing the royal children to their first snow experience, on March 3, then released them after their return on March 7. John Stillwell, WPA Pool, Getty Images
 The Duchess of Cambridge, or Countess of Stathearn as she is known in Scotland, visited three school-based mental-health charity projects in Edinburgh on Feb. 24, 2016. She had on a forest green belted coat when she arrived at St Catherine's Primary School to see the children's mental health charity Place2Be. Anwar Hussein, WireImage
 Kate joined Will in their former Wales home on Anglesey to mark the end of the RAF Search and Rescue Force, which has been privatized. Will used to be a helicopter pilot for the RAF. The couple traveled to RAF Valley on Feb. 18, 2016. Peter Byrne, WPA Pool, Getty Images
 She's back. Kate's first engagement of 2016 was to attend a church service at St Clement Danes in London on Feb. 7, to mark the 75th anniversary of RAF Air Cadets as the new patron, or Honorary Air Commandant. EDDIE MULHOLLAND, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate of Cambridge is back to work after a few months off for maternity leave following the birth and christening of her second baby, Princess Charlotte of Cambridge. She is as slender as ever and just as stylish, as these pictures show. Luke MacGregor, AFP/Getty Images
 Duchess Kate and Prince William attended the Diplomatic Reception at Buckingham Palace on Dec. 8, 2015, the annual white-tie event hosted by the queen. Photographers snapped her as she flashed by in a Bentley but it was enough to see she was wearing the diamond-and-pearl Cambridge Lover's Knot tiara and diamond chandelier earrings. It was only her fourth time in a tiara, but this one is special as it was often worn by Will's mother, the late Princess Diana (although she complained it was too heavy and gave her headaches.) The tiara belongs to the queen, who inherited it from her grandmother, Queen Mary, who designed it, based on one owned by her grandmother, in the early 20th century. No word yet on who Kate was wearing for the reception but the gown looked lacy and white. Mark Cuthbert, UK Press via Getty Images
 A little over a month after Charlotte's birth in May, Kate appeared with the royal family on the balcony of Buckingham Palace for the annual Trooping The Colour ceremony on June 13, 2015. She wore an ice blue-and-ivory floral silk coatdress by Catherine Walker, topped with an ivory round hat with a curled feather, according to the blogs that track her style. Chris Jackson, Getty Images
 For Princess Charlotte's christening on July 5, 2015, the family walked to the church at Sandringham in front of crowds of fans and media. Kate wore wore a creamy white coat dress, custom-made by the Alexander McQueen label, with a wide flaring collar neckline and a matching hat. WPA Pool, Getty Images
 Later in July, she and Prince William went to Portsmouth to visit the headquarters of Britain's team for the America's Cup World Series event. Both royals wore navy blue Ben Ainslie Racing pullovers by sailing outfitter Henri Lloyd, and Kate's skinny jeans showed off her figure. Ian Vogler, Getty Images, WPA Pool,
 She was out of sight for all of August but in mid-September she was back to her royal duties, visiting the Anna Freud Centre in London on September 17, 2015, to highlight her patronage of a charity that treats children and young people with mental health problems. It was her first solo engagement since the birth of Charlotte, and she showed off her new side bangs for the occasion. Chris Jackson, AFP/Getty Images
 Both Will and Kate have made mental-health awareness a focus of their patronage, so they both appeared at an event to mark World Mental Health Day on October 10, 2015. They met with young people to talk about their battles with the stigma against mental-health disorders, especially for children. Arthur Edwards, AFP/Getty Images
 For this engagement, Kate chose her Tory Burch Paulina knit dress, a frock she made famous in New Zealand in 2014 when she wore it to Prince George's first-ever public appearance during a playdate with Kiwi kiddies in Wellington in April 2014. ARTHUR EDWARDS, AFP/Getty Images
 Kate usually dives right in at her engagements. In this case, she sat down to talk with young people dealing with mental-health issues and now volunteer with the anti-stigma campaign Time to Change or Mind, at Harrow College in Middlesex, England, on Oct. 10. Arthur Edwards, AP
 After the mental-health engagement, the couple watched the Australia v Wales match during the Rugby World Cup 2015 at Twickenham Stadium in London. Kate wore her Reiss Delaney flared coat over a black turtleneck sweater and a dark-red scarf thrown around her neck. Karwai Tang, WireImage
 A royal state banquet is a sight to behold, and it happens about twice a year under Queen Elizabeth II. It takes place in the palace banquet hall, and includes about 170 guests - the great and good from the royal family, politics and government and business. The menu for this dinner feature venison from the queen's Balmoral estate. WPA Pool, Getty Images
 On the second day of the China state visit, Will and Kate joined Chinese President Xi Jinping and wife his wife Peng Liyuan at Lancaster House in London, for a creative-industry event celebrating cultural collaborations between the U.K. and China, on Oct. 21, 2015. HEATHCLIFF O'MALLEY, AFP/Getty Images
 At a charity event for kids at BAFTA on Oct. 26, Kate wore a Tabitha Webb frock in a space-inspired pattern of blue, white and black. Here she participates in welly wanging: throwing a kiddie Wellington rain boot as far as possible. It's a Brit thing. Tim Ireland, AP
 By evening on oct. 26, she had changed into a Jenny Packham gown for the royal premiere of the new Bond film, 'Spectre' at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Her dress was pale blue, see-through, with a full skirt and cinched at the waist with a glittery crystal-covered belt. David M. Benett, Dave Benett/WireImage
 A third look at Kate in the same week (including the tiara-topped appearance at the Diplomatic Reception) on Dec. 8). This time she visited the Center for Addiction Treatment Studies, run by her charity, Action on Addiction, in Wiltshire, England, on Dec. 10, 2015. The addiction-fighting organization is one of her first patronages, as she has made tough subjects, such as addiction and mental health, among her top patronage priorities. Note the shorter haircut, first seen in full on Dec. 9. Eddie Mulholland/, AP
 Now note the length of her hair in this picture from her April 2014 tour of New Zealand, when she wore the same dress, too. She's greeted with a hongi by a little girl as she arrives at airport in Dunedin, New Zealand. Samir Hussein, WireImage
 Kate was the first customer of the newly opened shop so she had first choice in picking out presents for her two children, a storybook for Prince George and a Beatrix Potter figurine for Princess Charlotte, according to the 'Daily Mail' and the 'Mirror.' WPA Pool, Getty Images
 Four days before heading to India and Bhutan on their latest overseas tour, Will and Kate hosted a reception at Kensington Palace for students from both countries studying in Britain. Kate chose an unusual floor-length frock for the occasion, the Mary Illusion Dot Dress by Moda Operandi in deep royal blue. WPA Pool, Getty Images
