Hurricane Harvey: That shark photo is fake — and part of a bigger problem
CLOSE

 More than 17,000 people have sought refuge in Texas shelters, according to the American Red Cross. Houston said it would set up at least two more mega-shelters. (Aug. 29) AP

Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated the role of the Fox News employee fooled by the shark photo. He is a host. 
As a captivated nation watches a historic storm ravage the Texas coast, people around the country are sharing extraordinary images of Harvey and its aftermath.
Except some of them aren't real.
• There's the shark on a freeway in Houston (the doctored image has been online for years and made appearances during Hurricane Irene and Hurricane Sandy, but still managed to fool a Fox News host — who later apologized).
Believe it or not, this is a shark on the freeway in Houston, Texas. #HurricaneHarvypic.twitter.com/ANkEiEQ3Y6
— Jason Michael (@Jeggit) August 28, 2017
• There are the planes submerged on the tarmac in Houston (the photoshopped picture actually shows New York's LaGuardia Airport).
Houston Airport ~ Feeling bad for family & friends... more rain is expected tonight @realDonaldTrump@POTUSpic.twitter.com/bkwuYaksvF
— eliud (@oilrunners) August 28, 2017
• And there's President Obama serving food to people evacuated from the Houston floods (which is a shot from a homeless shelter in Washington, D.C., where Obama and his family served Thanksgiving dinner in 2015). 
Trump tweets about himself while Obama serves meals in a shelter in Houston. #HurricaneHarveypic.twitter.com/SLnQcHzdR7
— Butterfly Rebellion (@Butterfly_Reb) August 28, 2017
On the Internet, things that seem unfathomable are legitimatized through reinforced attention. When enough people tweet a photo, it can seem real. Media experts say when false images go viral, feeling often trumps reason. 
Why fake photos spread
Doctored photos aren't reserved for natural disasters. This month, a widely circulated image that appeared to capture a member of anti-fascist group Anitfa beating a police officer during a “Unite the Right” rally in Charlottesville, Va., turned out to be fake. After President Trump held a rally in Phoenix last week, his supporters shared an image of what was purportedly a massive crowd in the streets ahead of his speech, but the photo is actually an aerial shot from the 2016 Cleveland Cavaliers parade.
Jonathan Albright, research director at Columbia University's Tow Center for Digital Journalism, said there are times when the nation is more susceptible to the spread of false images.
"I think emotion drives a huge part of this," he said. "There's going to be emotion involved in any kind of political campaign, any type of social debate or heated cultural issue, and also natural disasters are going to fall into that same category," he said. 
Al Tompkins, of the Poynter Institute for media studies, said the reasons why people share fake photos fall into three buckets:
Misinformation: Someone unintentionally shares bad information. The person sharing the image isn't necessarily malicious. They could be sharing a real photo with the wrong timing. During Hurricane Sandy, a photo of soldiers standing guard over the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier went viral. It was a real photo, but it was not taken during Sandy.
Disinformation: This is a lie. A person tries to intentionally mislead. Images are photoshopped or doctored and context is removed. It could be a prankster attempting to create chaos or a person trying to advance a political goal.
Propaganda: Images intended to sell a product or idea.
When people fall for them
"I think natural disasters create a kind of perfect storm for viral rumors," said Peter Adams, senior vice president of educational programs at the News Literacy Project. "These are very emotional events. There is a lot fear in the immediate area. There's a lot of confusion and there's intense curiosity on the part of the rest of public to see what's happening on the ground."

 With one fan already running in this bedroom, Helen Benjamin reaches to turn on the ceiling fan after opening the windows to let her house air out after flooding caused by Hurricane Harvey in Houston. Larry McCormack, The Tennessean
 Hay bales are pushed from a Michigan Army National Guard Chinook helicopter in the Hamshire area of Texas. The bales were set to help feed an estimated 2,000 head of livestock stranded by Harvey floodwaters. Guiseppe Barranco, The Beaumont Enterprise, via AP
 Anna Ucheomumu, left, high fives Houston Texans defensive end J.J. Watt after loading a car with relief supplies to people impacted by Hurricane Harvey on Sept. 3, 2017, in Houston. J.J. Watt's Hurricane Harvey Relief Fund, which raised more than $18 million to date to help those affected by the storm. Pool Photo by Brett Coomer
 Houston Texans defensive end Christian Covington carries water while distributing relief supplies to people impacted by Hurricane Harvey on Sept. 3, 2017, in Houston. J.J. Watt's Hurricane Harvey Relief Fund, which raised more than $18 million to date to help those affected by the storm. Pool Photo by Brett Coomer
 Church members are seen through the window of a water damaged room as they gather in the parking lot of the First Baptist Church for a service on Sept. 3, 2017, in Humble, Texas. The church building was flooded with two feet of water during Hurricane Harvey prompting services to be held outside. Charlie Riedel, AP
 Terri Bubb, left, and Nita Clements sing a hymn on Sept. 3, 2017, during the service at First United Methodist Church in Dickinson, Texas. Church members and area residents filled the storm damaged sanctuary to worship together one week after floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey inundated the city and much of Southeast Texas. Jennifer Reynolds, The Galveston County Daily News via AP
 Pastor Kathy Sebring, left, leads church elders in prayer before the start of a worship service in the front lawn of the First Presbyterian Church of Dickinson on Sept. 3, 2017, in Dickinson, Texas. The First Presbyterian Church of Dickinson was badly damaged in the floods from Harvey. Steve Gonzales, Houston Chronicle via AP
 Elvira Vera jumps out of her car to embrace Houston Texans defensive end J.J. Watt as he distributes relief supplies to people impacted by Hurricane Harvey on Sept. 3, 2017, in Houston. Watt's Hurricane Harvey Relief Fund has raised more than $18 million to date to help those affected by the storm. Pool photo by Brett Coomer
 Dave Pauli, with the Humane Society of the United States Animal Rescue Team, carries a dog captured on a property with five other dogs being seized in Fulton, Texas, on Sept. 3, 2017. He is in Aransas County helping rescue dogs, cats and other animals left by owners before and after Hurricane Harvey. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Cruz Dargas carries a deer head as he volunteers his time to help bring items out of homes inundated with floodwater in an area where a mandatory evacuation is still under effect on Sept. 3, 2017 in Houston. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Harry Decour hugs a church member after prayers were said for those affected by the recent flooding during the 11:15 service at Fifth Ward Church of Christ on Sept. 3, 2017, in Houston. Larry McCormack , The Tennessean via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Becky May wipes away tears as she prays with members of the Pine Forest Baptist Church, as they hold Sunday services in the parking lot outside their damaged church, in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Harvey in Vidor, Texas on Sept. 3, 2017. The church was flooded from the storm and is currently unusable. Gerald Herbert, AP
 Deacon Scott Glueck, right, talks with a woman in the halls of Klein High School as parishioners from flood-damaged St. Ignatius Loyola Catholic Community Church arrive for services Sept. 3, 2017, in Klein, Texas. As clean up and repairs continue at the church just outside of Houston, parishioners turned a high school auditorium into their sanctuary on a Sunday that was declared National Day of Prayer for Harvey victims by President Trump. Gregory Bull, AP
 Parishioners of the Lakewood Church led by Pastor Joel Osteen pray together during a service at the church as the city starts the process of rebuilding after severe flooding during Hurricane and Tropical Storm Harvey on Sept. 3, 2017, in Houston. Pastor Osteen drew criticism after initially not opening the doors of his church to victims of Hurricane Harvey. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Malcolm Hunt of Milwaukee, WI, takes off his boot which is beyond repair as he stands on a flooded portion of State Route 96 in Beaumont, Texas on Saturday, Sept. 2, 2017. Hunt and a friend voluntarily came to the Houston/Beaumont area to lead search and rescue missions in flooded neighborhoods. Danielle Parhizkaran, Northjersey.com via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Amy Torres hugs her brother Cody Adams, of Beaumont, Texas, after he was rescued from being stranded on a median in the middle of State Route 96 in rough flood waters in Beaumont on Sept. 2, 2017. Adams was saved by Bill Zang (not pictured) in his hovercraft. Danielle Parhizkaran, Northjersey.com via USA TODAY NETWORK
 H.E.B. Grocery employees hand out hot lunches for those in need in Beaumont, Texas on Sept. 2, 2017. The mobile kitchens, situated in the parking lot of H.E.B. Grocery on College street, served 2,000 meals for lunch and anticipate serving the same amount for dinner at 5 P.M. tonight. Danielle Parhizkaran, Northjersey.com via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Trish Huddleston and Allie Coogan came out to show their support for their city and their team as the Astros played the Mets in a double header in Houston on Sept. 2, 2017, in the first big event after the area was deluged with catastrophic flooding. 'We just needed a diversion after all that's happened' Huddleston said. Larry McCormack , The Tennessean via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Residents hold signs at a roadblock into their Canyon Gate neighborhood which was flooded when the Barker Reservoir reached capacity in the aftermath of Harvey, Sept. 2, 2017, in Katy, Texas. Residents gathered at the checkpoint to vent their frustrations about not being able to get back into their homes which will remain flooded for several more days while the reservoir drains. Charlie Riedel, AP
 Tibisay Vegas cleans out her car after it was inundated with water as she begins the process of rebuilding after torrential rains caused widespread flooding during Hurricane and Tropical Storm Harvey on Sept. 2, 2017, in Houston, Texas. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Dry wall, furniture and carpets sit outside of Staci Beinart's home on Sept. 1, 2017, after flooding from Hurricane Harvey damaged the Meyerland neighborhood of Houston. The Beinart family was rescued by Nick Sissa, who happened to be driving paramedics around in his military vehicle when they were called to help Beinart's nine-year-old son who was having an asthma attack. Danielle Parhizkaran, Northjersey.com via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Nick Sissa bought a military vehicle for the fun of it. He ended up going out in the flooding during Hurricane Harvey and rescued about 300 people stranded in their homes in the Houston area. Photographed visiting one of the families he saved in the Meyerland neighborhood of Houston on Sept. 1, 2017. Danielle Parhizkaran, Northjersey.com via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Sasha Ryder, dressed as Harley Quinn, hugs Jasmine Newton, 8, after Newton gave Ryder her own Harley Quinn bracelet to wear. Comic book and Disney characters greeted children entering the George R. Brown Convention Center in Houston, TX on Friday. Danielle Parhizkaran, Northjersey.com
 Dustin Baxter (from left) registers his daughters Khylynn Baxter, 5, and Kynslee Baxter, 4, for kindergarten and pre-kindergarten at Flour Bluff Independent School District. The family is from Port Aransas, TX, an area devastated by Hurricane Harvey. The school district in Port Aransas has declared school indefinitely closed. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times
 Alice Liu (from left), 6, Harper Norton, 3, Linda Liu, 11, and Vickie Liu, 3, wait while their moms, including Jianhong Sue (right) register the older children for school at the Flour Bluff Independent School District. Their home school district will be closed indefinitely. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times
 Vicki Hartzell takes a break from cleaning her townhouse, as trash bags pile up on her steps, after flooding in Friendswood, Texas on Friday. The Hartzell's entire first floor was flooded as Clear Creek overflowed it's banks during Tropical Storm Harvey. Kevin M. Cox, AP
 Hope Shoemaker (left), 13, and Olivia Adams, 13, pick out a donated backpack for the first day of school while getting registered for school at the Flour Bluff Independent School District on Friday, September 1, 2017. They are from Port Aransas, TX, an area devastated by Hurricane Harvey. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times
 Family members of Frances Cirilo helped her clear out her flooded East Houston home on Thursday. Many along Linda Vista and Oak Knoll drives started cleaning out their homes as they begin to rebuild after Hurricane Harvey. Parhizkaran, Danielle, The Record and NorthJersey.com via the USA TODAY Network
 Deidra Cate is comforted by Vice President Pence in Rockport, Texas, on Aug. 31, 2017. Cate said parents are extremely concerned about the state of the schools and want to get them running as soon as possible. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times via the USA TODAY Network
 Theresa Reyes, RN BSN Operations Director, and Estaban Guzman, Paramedic Firefighter (both are swift water rescue technicians with Help.NGO's Global Disaster Immediate Response Team) help to evacuate others in Port Arthur, Texas, on Aug 31, 2017. Nick Oza, The Arizona Republic via the USA TODAY Network
 This is a satellite image of the flooding around Houston photographed by a Deimos-2 satellite on Aug. 30, 2017. The red is vegetation, since the image was produced in near-infrared/false color. That’s a traditional band combination useful to see changes in plants’ health. The denser vegetation grows and the more chlorophyll the plants have, the more intense is the red color. Deimos Imaging, an UrtheCast company
 Rescuers, some trained first responders and other volunteers, help to evacuate the Gulf Health Care Center, a nursing home in Port Arthur, Texas. Elderly patients, many of the bedridden, needed assistance getting out of the facility that had nearly a foot of water in the lobby by 3 p.m. on Aug. 30, 2017. Nick Oza, The Arizona Republic, via USA TODAY Newtwork
 Family members react as a van is pulled out of the Greens Bayou with the bodies of six family members on Aug. 30, 2017, in Houston. The van was carried into the bayou during Tropical Storm Harvey as the water went over the bridge. Elizabeth Conley, Houston Chronicle via AP
 A car sits submerged on the I-10 East Frontage Road in the Energy Corridor of west Houston, Texas where families were rescued from their flooded homes and apartments due to high water coming from the Addicks Reservoir after Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 30, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Erich Schlegel, Getty Images
 Michael Boyd passes his son Skylar over to a rescue worker as they are evacuated on an airboat from their apartment complex after it was inundated with water following Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 30, 2017 in Houston. Scott Olson, Getty Images
 Gladys Dasi holds her two-month-old son Elliott while sheltering at Gallery Furniture on Aug. 30, 2017, in Richmond, Texas. Dasi with her husband and four kids evacuated their Richmond home Sunday after it flooded as a result of Hurricane Harvey. The furniture store opened as a shelter housing as many as 350 people in an area being constructed as a museum of American industry. Charlie Riedel, AP
 Tiffaany Duron and her daughter Emma Sledge, 3, hug their dog Daisy on Aug, 30, 2017, outside the George R. Brown Convention Center where they took shelter after Hurricane Harvey flooded their home in Houston. Lee Celano, The Advertiser via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Lance Esswein digs through the rubble of his wife's antique and resale shop in Rockport, Texas on Aug. 29, 2017. The shop was flattened by Hurricane Harvey. "My wife's dream is in this shop," he said. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times, via USA TODAY Network
 Local residents are evacuated by a military vehicle in the Clodine district after Hurricane Harvey caused heavy flooding in Houston, Texas on Aug. 29, 2017. Floodwaters have breached a levee south of the city of Houston, officials said Tuesday, urging residents to leave the area immediately. Mark Ralston, AFP/Getty Images
 Texas Army National Guard members Sergio Esquivel, left, and Ernest Barmore carry 81-year-old Ramona Bennett after she and other residents were rescued from their Pine Forest Village neighborhood due to high water from Hurricane Harvey Aug. 29, 2017, in Houston. Erich Schlegel, Getty Images
 People line up for food as others rest at the George R. Brown Convention Center that has been set up as a shelter for evacuees escaping the floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey in Houston, Texas on Aug. 29, 2017. LM Otero, AP
 William Loosemore adds wood to his smoker as he prepares food for first responders, volunteer and those in need of a meal on Aug. 29, 2017, in Rockport, Texas, where recovery after Hurricane Harvey continues. Loosemore is hoping President Donald Trump will stop by during his visit to Texas. Eric Gay, AP
 Linda Hart rode out Hurricane Harvey in their trailer near Bronte Street in Fulton, Texas. She said she held hands with her husband William and prayed they would survive. They didn't evacuate because of their dogs. "If I can't take my dogs you leave me right where I am," Hart said. Rachel Denny Clow, Corpus Christi Caller-Times
 Volunteers Elizabeth Duran and Dana Jamieson helping to sort clothes at the George R. Brown Convention Center in Lafayette, La., which is being used as a shelter for residents who have been displaced by flood waters on Aug. 28, 2017. Scott Clause, The Daily Advertiser via USATODAY Network
 Mindy Walker and her 3-year-old son Connor Martinez are helped out of a boat after being rescued from their home along Cypress Creek at Kuykendal 15 miles northwest of downtown Houston on Aug. 28, 2017. The areas in and around Houston and south Texas are experiencing record floods after more than 24 inches of rain after Harvey made landfall in the south coast of Texas as a category 4 hurricane, the most powerful to affect the US since 2004. Harvey has weakened and been downgraded to a tropical storm and is expected to cause heavy rain for several days. Michael Wyke, European Pressphoto Agency
 Arthur Kolten, 96, center, was rescued by volunteers in a motor boat from his flooded home in the Meyerland neighborhood after Hurricane Harvey inundated the area on Aug. 28, 2017 in Houston. Harvey, which made landfall north of Corpus Christi late Friday evening, is expected to dump upwards to 40 inches of rain in areas of Texas over the next couple of days. Erich Schlegel, Getty Images
 There are currently more than 2,500 flood evacuees from tropical storm Harvey sheltered in the George R. Brown convention center in downtown Houston, according to David Schoeneck, Red Cross public affairs supervisor. In addition to this Red Cross shelters, impromptu shelters have been set up at schools and businesses throughout the Houston area. Kris Wartelle, Daily Advertiser via USA TODAY Network
 Mike Bierd works to clean up one of his properties in Rockport, Texas following Hurricane Harvey. "It's just a matter of time, we'll get it all stuck back together and make it pretty again," he said. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times via USA TODAY NETWORK
 Peggy Tomblin, left and her daughter, Lisa Loos, have both been waiting on word of their husbands after they went missing in Rockport, Texas following Hurricane Harvey. Tomblin received word her husband had been found Sunday and returned, but he couldn't be located. Loos' husband got in contact with her. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times, via USA TODAY Network
 Houston Police SWAT officer Daryl Hudeck carries Catherine Pham and her 13-month-old son Aiden after rescuing them from their home surrounded by floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey on Aug. 27, 2017, in Houston. The remnants of Hurricane Harvey sent devastating floods pouring into Houston Sunday as rising water chased thousands of people to rooftops or higher ground. David J. Phillip, AP
 Sam Speights holds two of his dogs as he checks on the damage to his home in the wake of Hurricane Harvey, on Aug. 27, 2017, in Rockport, Texas. Speights tried to stay in his home during the storm but had to move to other shelter after he lost his roof and back wall. Eric Gay, AP
 Volunteers and officers from the neighborhood security patrol help to rescue residents in the upscale River Oaks neighborhood after it was inundated with flooding from Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 27, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Harvey, which made landfall north of Corpus Christi late Friday evening, is expected to dump upwards to 40 inches of rain in Texas over the next couple of days. Scott Olson, Getty Images
 Precinct 6 Deputy Constables Sgt. Paul Fernandez, from left, Sgt. Michael Tran and Sgt. Radha Patel rescue an elderly woman from rising water on North MacGregor Way, near Brays Bayou, after heavy rains from the remnants of Hurricane Harvey on Aug. 27, 2017. Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle via AP
 A trailer home's stairs are lodged in an SUV's windshield in Port Aransas, Texas, on, Aug. 27, 2017. Officials continue to keep the city on lockdown, preventing residents from entering the city after Hurricane Harvey hit the Texas coast as a Category 4 storm, damaging buildings and leaving tens of thousands without power. Nick Wagner, Austin American-Statesman via AP
 Andrew White (L) helps a neighbor down a street after rescuing her from her home in his boat in the upscale River Oaks neighborhood after it was inundated with flooding from Hurricane Harvey on August 27, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Scott Olson, Getty Images
 Ruby Young waits with her husband, Claude Young, after being rescued from their flooded home by boat and taken to a pickup point on Aug. 27, 2017. The elderly man had many medical issues from a stroke in May. Melissa Phillip, Houston Chronicle via AP
 Volunteers and officers from the neighborhood security patrol help to rescue residents and their dogs in the upscale River Oaks neighborhood after it was inundated with flooding from Hurricane Harvey on August 27, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Scott Olson, Getty Images
 A man walks through floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey as he evacuates his home on Aug. 27, 2017, in Houston, Texas. Rescuers answered hundreds of calls for help Sunday as floodwaters from the remnants of Hurricane Harvey rose high enough to begin filling second-story homes, and authorities urged stranded families to seek refuge on their rooftops. Charlie Riedel, AP
 Robert Grant and Rocky from the Texas Task Force 2 search and rescue team work through a destroyed apartment complex trying to find anyone that still may be in the apartment complex after Hurricane Harvey passed through on Aug. 27, 2017 in Rockport, Texas. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Members of the Texas Task Force 2 search and rescue team work through a destroyed apartment complex trying to find anyone that still may be in the apartment complex after Hurricane Harvey passed through on Aug. 27, 2017, in Rockport, Texas. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Two kayakers try to beat the current pushing them down an overflowing Brays Bayou along S. Braeswood in Houston, Texas, Aug. 27, 2017. Rescuers answered hundreds of calls for help Sunday as floodwaters from the remnants of Hurricane Harvey climbed high enough to begin filling second-story homes, and authorities urged stranded families to seek refuge on their rooftops. Mark Mulligan, Houston Chronicle via AP
 Damage to a two-story apartment building after Hurricane Harvey hit Rockport, Texas on Aug. 26, 2017. Hurricane Harvey left a trail of devastation Saturday after the most powerful storm to hit the US mainland in over a decade slammed into Texas, destroying homes, severing power supplies and forcing tens of thousands of residents to flee. Mark Ralston, AFP/Getty Images
 Inmates Gaij Capistran, left, Victor Bravo, center, and Joseph Perez sit outside of the Refugio County Jail as they wait to be told what clean up work needs to be done after Hurricane Harvey in Refugio, Texas on Aug. 26, 2017. Olivia Vanni, The Victoria Advocate via AP
 Paul Johnson cuts a tree with only a machete in the Hillcrest neighborhood of Corpus Christi, TX Aug. 26, 2017, the morning after Hurricane Harvey. "It's all right, it's life, he said." Hillcrest is one of the poorest communities in Corpus Christi. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times via the USA TODAY Network
 Donna Raney makes her way out of the wreckage of her home as Daisy Graham tells her she will help her out of the window after Hurricane Harvey destroyed the apartment in Rockport, Texas. Raney was hiding in the shower after the roof blew off and the walls of her home caved in. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Billy Raney and Donna Raney climb over the wreckage of what is left of their apartment after Hurricane Harvey destroyed it in Rockport, Texas. Donna and Billy were hiding in the shower after the roof blew off and the walls of her home caved in. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 Terry Smith stands in the apartment that had its ceiling collapse when Hurricane Harvey hit in Rockport, Texas. Smith said she has never been as terrified in her life as when the winds started roaring through town. Joe Raedle, Getty Images
 A fishing boat is left partial submerged after Hurricane Harvey swept through Corpus Christi. Harvey has been further downgraded to a Category 1 hurricane as it churns slowly inland from the Texas Gulf Coast, already depositing more than 9 inches of rain in south Texas. Eric Gay, AP
 Aaron Berg fills up a gas can and his portable generator on Aug. 24, 2017, in Houston as Hurricane Harvey intensifies in the Gulf of Mexico. Harvey is forecast to be a major hurricane when it makes landfall along the middle Texas coastline. David J. Phillip, AP
 Ken Knox secures a friend's boat at the Corpus Christi Marina Aug. 24, 2017 in advance of Tropical Storm Harvey. The storm is expected to be a category 3 hurricane by the time it makes landfall. "I would give anything not to stay here, but somebody's got to stay," he said. Rachel Denny Clow, Caller-Times via the USA TODAY Network
 People fill sandbags behind the Seaman's Memorial Tower in Aransas Pass, Texas, ahead of a tropical storm on Aug. 23, 2017. Texas Gov. Greg Abbott has ordered the State Operations Center to elevate its readiness level and is making state resources available for preparation and possible rescue and recovery actions amid forecasts a tropical storm will make landfall along the Texas Gulf Coast. Courtney Sacco, Corpus Christi Caller-Times, via AP
 William Hazzard loads water into his car as he prepares for tropical weather in Houston Aug. 24, 2017. Tropical Storm Harvey is expected to intensify over the warm waters of the Gulf of Mexico before reaching the Texas coast Friday. David J. Phillip, AP
Last SlideNext Slide
It can be hard to spot the ruse. Some of that has to do with confirmation bias. If a person is told the storm's destruction is unprecedented, they'll look for images to confirm it, especially if the story becomes political. 
"Climate change immediately came into the debate about [Harvey's] scale of destruction, so some people are going to go find certain images and content to support those ideas," Albright said. 
People also don't always know what's possible. For some, the image of a shark swimming through Houston is unbelievable. For others, it's plausible.
"What's feasible is really an unknown for I think the average citizen," Adams said. "There are videos on Reddit of fish in people's basements ... so is it feasible that a shark would be swimming down the flooded highway, coming in from the Gulf? People aren't really sure."
When the phrase 'fake news' is 'weaponized'
Adams worries about conflating individuals who doctor photos for virality with journalists who make mistakes when reporting breaking news. 
"Fake news actually does refer to a very specific kind of misinformation, that's entirely fabricated and designed to look like standard journalism," Adams said. "That meaning has been lost as the term has been politicized and weaponized ... and I think the public — especially when it comes to political news — doesn't know what to believe because they have pundits telling them that news organizations are engaging in some of the same tactics that fake news purveyors are, which absolutely isn't true."
So what might happen if the public grows overly wary of being inundated with false information?
"I worry that we will become a society of cynics who believe nothing," Tompkins said.
He isn't alone. 
"I think being skeptical is not just great but necessary for citizens now in this information landscape," Adams said. "But that means asking more questions. ... Your skepticism is the beginning of a process, where you're trying to confirm the details and facts. Cynicism in my view is turning away from the possibility of knowing. If you believe nothing is knowable unless 'I see it myself, I don't trust anyone to tell me anything,' you're really ending inquiry. You're not finding out. You're not willing to believe anyone and that's ultimately very disempowering personally, but also for the country." 
How to spot a fake photo
To curb the spread of false images, Albright and Adams say when you see something that seems unthinkable, think before sharing it.
"If you have a strong emotional reaction to something — whether it's a picture of a flooded airport or a natural disaster, or if it's something that outrages you or angers you politically — if you find yourself having a strong emotional reaction, stop, take a breath, try to have your rational mind kick back in and set your emotions aside and try to evaluate the truth," Adams said.
To avoid being duped, Adams encourages readers to follow reporters who cover misinformation. Craig Silverman of BuzzFeed News studies media inaccuracy and the site has a running list of false and inaccurate information coming out of Harvey. 
And there are practical steps you can take, as well:
Using Google Chrome, right click on the image.
Click "search Google for an image." This will show results for similar images, sometimes even the same one. Usually, a fake photo will come up in old results.
Checking the veracity of an image means a person can more confidentially share a compelling photo.
One of the most evocative images from Harvey is of elderly residents trapped in waist-deep water in a nursing home near Houston. Many Twitter users said it was fake, and were reluctant to share it, but the photo was proven to be authentic. 
La vita Bella nursing home in Dickinson Texas is almost underwater with nursing home patients pic.twitter.com/oCNkrgoRZY
— Timothy J. McIntosh (@DividendsMGR) August 27, 2017
"It was so incredible," Albright said. "I don't know if I've ever seen an image like that."
Albright shared the photo from his Twitter account, but not immediately. He looked at the source of the tweet, a user named Timothy J. McIntosh‏, who, while not verified with the platform's authoritative blue checkmark, appeared to be what Albright deemed a credible source. McIntosh‏ responded to users in the thread of the original tweet insisting the image was not fake. A user in the comment thread posted a photo of what she said was a home less than a mile away that appeared to be partially underwater. McIntosh‏ followed up the original tweet with another imploring emergency services to head to La Vita Bella nursing home. 
A reporter for The Daily News in Galveston interviewed McIntosh‏ and local authorities, who confirmed the residents were rescued. 
In the age of the Internet, readers not only consume news, they disseminate it. It's paramount, Albright said, that they act responsibly in that dual role. 
"It's up to people," Albright said. "If something looks so unbelievable and it barely makes sense and you can't fathom how it can be possible but you still share it anyway, I think that's a problem."
