5 things you need to know Monday
Obama opens up trade with Cuba, allows unlimited cigars, rum
Rum drinkers and cigar smokers, rejoice: You can now bring home all the Cuban cigars and rum you want. A new Obama administration rule that goes into effect Monday will allow travelers to purchase unlimited quantities of the island’s rum and cigars in any country where they are sold for personal consumption only. (Note: You can’t order them online.) The change follows a series of moves from President Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro to normalize relations between the Cold War enemies. Want to go to Cuba to pick up the goods? Southwest Airlines announced last Thursday it would begin scheduled flights to Cuba on Nov. 13.
CLOSE

 Are they really that much better than other cigars? 
Correction & clarification: An earlier version of this item about ALCS misstated the last time the series was in Canada. The error has since been removed.
Toronto Blue Jays host Cleveland Indians in ALCS
Baseball's American League Championship Series heads to Canada when the Toronto Blue Jays host the Cleveland Indians in Game 3 at 8 p.m. ET. The Indians hold a 2-0 lead, but one can only wonder if their small core of key pitchers can hold up through the entire series. After missing Game 2 due to a drone-related injury, Trevor Bauer will make the start for Cleveland against Toronto's Marcus Stroman.

 Game 5 in Toronto: The Indians advance to their first World Series since 1997. John E. Sokolowski, USA TODAY Spo
'Rolling Stone' set to begin defamation trial
Rolling Stone will stand trial Monday in a defamation suit filed by a former University of Virginia dean over the magazine's botched article about an alleged gang rape. The discredited 2014 article — A Rape on Campus — depicts an alleged incident during which “Jackie,” the anonymous survivor, was lured upstairs at a 2012 fraternity party, raped and beaten by several men. Nicole Eramo, then an associate dean of students, believes the article cast her as the “chief villain” and indicated that she was instrumental in persuading Jackie not to report the rape or share her story. Rolling Stone issued an apology for the article and later fully retracted it.
CLOSE

 UVA's associate dean of students is suing Rolling Stone for nearly $8 million, claiming the magazine ruined her reputation in a now-debunked article. Video provided by Newsy Newsy
Penn State assistant coach's whistleblower lawsuit goes to trial
Mike McQueary, a former Penn State coach whose testimony helped convict Jerry Sandusky of child sex abuse, will see his lawsuit go to trial on Monday over allegations that the university wrongly declined to renew his contract. McQueary, now 42, was an assistant coach under Joe Paterno in 2001 when he reported seeing Sandusky, then a retiree with gym privileges, sexually molesting a boy in the team shower. No action was taken until a decade later when Sandusky was arrested and McQueary was suspended with pay from the football program. McQueary argues that top administrators who misled the prosecutors retaliated against McQueary for cooperating with authorities, defaming him and in 2012, after Sandusky's conviction of abusing 10 boys, terminating him from his $140,000-a-year job.

N.J. Transit to resume full Hoboken service since crash
New Jersey Transit said it would resume full service into and out of Hoboken Terminal Monday morning. Commuters had seen more than two weeks of limited service following a train crash that killed one woman on the platform and injured 114 others on the train. NJ Transit Executive Director Steven Santoro said the railroad is taking extra precautions as it restores service: Trains entering Hoboken Terminal have to reduce their speed from 10 mph to 5 mph, and a conductor will ride in the cab car with the engineer.

 Emergency officials stand outside of the Hoboken Terminal following a train crash Sept. 29, 2016 in Hoboken, N.J. A commuter train crashed into the rail station during the morning rush hour, causing serious damage. Julio Cortez, AP
And the essentials:
Stocks: Asian shares were mixed Monday as cautious investors considered the most recent comments by Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen.
TV Tonight: Wondering what to watch tonight? TV critic Robert Bianco looks at Jane the Virgin and Odd Couple.
Be inspired: Ugandan choir finds hope and love through music.
Most popular: See our top stories in one nightly digest on Facebook Messenger.
If you missed the weekend's news, we've got you covered. 
You can subscribe to get the day's top news each weekday in your inbox.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2ekSStH
