2018 Draft: Ok St WR James Washington meets with, wants to play for Cowboys
By January 23, 2018 1:24 pm ET  Follow @KDDrummondNFL  
 518 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 23, 2018 1:24 pm ET  Follow @KDDrummondNFL  
The Cowboys could be looking at picking up a wide receiver early in the 2018 draft. One of the main areas of improvement for an offense that grew stagnant and predictable was the lack of team speed. As Dez Bryant ages, the wide receiver corps no longer has a member who can run past defenders in addition to doing other things to make them a threat. Brice Butler was speedy as all get out, but he was unable to establish himself in other areas that made him more of a threat. He will be a free agent this offseason.
Recently, Cowboys Wire looked at the 2018 free agent class and identified 11 receivers who could inject the big-play element back into Dallas’ passing game. If they choose not to go in that direction, the draft will be another way to acquire this kind of talent. One player who fits the bill is Oklahoma State’s James Washington. If that were to come to pass, Washington would be all-too excited to sign on with his favorite team.
 Oklahoma State WR James Washington said it would be a dream come true to play for the Cowboys, his favorite team growing up. Said he'd be a great complement to Dez Bryant. Said he often studied his tape while at Oklahoma State. He said Dez needs help.
 — Brandon George (@DMN_George) January 23, 2018
Washington finished his college career with 39 touchdowns and 19.8 yards per catch average. He had 14 touchdowns as a senior while hauling in 1,549 receiving yards on 74 receptions. In last season’s Alamo Bowl, he lit up current Cowboys CB Chidobe Awuzie and the Colorado Buffaloes defense to the tune of nine receptions for 171 yards and a score.
This season, Pro Football Focus credited him with an NCAA-high 17 deep pass receptions through mid-November and a 3.47 yards per route run average, good for fifth in the sport.
 James Washington would help https://t.co/hiK0YmuJkg pic.twitter.com/69pWGxmtWG
 — Bob Sturm (@SportsSturm) January 23, 2018
 More James Washington would help here stuff pic.twitter.com/yga1f6KDy6
 — Bob Sturm (@SportsSturm) January 23, 2018
Many feel Washington’s stock could take a tumble after measuring so short in NFL receiver terms. If so, he may be a perfect fit for the Cowboys in the second round.
Like this article?
Sign up for the Cowboys Wire email newsletter to get our top stories in your inbox every morning
Success
 Thanks for signing up.
 You'll be waking up a little more awesome tomorrow. 
Whoa!
 Something went wrong.
