Time for Apple to update parental controls
CLOSE

 Apple Inc investors are shrugging off concerns raised by two shareholders about kids getting hooked on iPhones, saying that for now a little addiction might not be a bad thing for profits. Newslook
Preschoolers’ bikes still come with training wheels: Opposing view

CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDIN 3 COMMENTEMAILMORE
No one disputes that parents have the ultimate responsibility to ensure that their children use smartphones safely. And we said that precisely in our letter to Apple. That also applies to bike safety, but preschoolers’ bikes still come with training wheels.
The problem is that most experts agree that Apple’s parental controls, which were introduced in 2008 before most kids had smartphones, have failed to keep pace with the research on negative outcomes.
For example, Apple’s controls are largely binary, meaning parents can only shut certain applications or tools on or off, vs. moderating or modifying their usage, which research suggests is a better approach. Children who engage in limited use of their smartphones have better mental health outcomes than those who do not use them at all, and even the most concerning apps such as Facebook can also have beneficial impacts in moderation.
Speaking of which, we did not focus on Facebook first because Apple (unlike Facebook) can have an equally big impact on this issue without modifying Apple’s basic business model. In fact, offering better options to parents should enhance Apple’s business. In order to improve tools for parents, Apple needs to partner with child development experts from the start to create options that are grounded in the research, including tailoring them to different ages.
What seems especially odd about this debate is that no one disputes that there have been unintentional negative consequences for some kids from excessive smartphone usage, and not even Apple disputes that the company can help parents who want to stop this. Why anyone would not want Apple to do so is mystifying.
The good news is that Apple is a highly responsible and innovative company, and in response to the concerns we and others have raised, Apple committed this week to enhancing the optional tools offered to help parents, which should put this diversionary debate to rest.
Barry Rosenstein is managing partner at Jana Partners LLC.
If you can't see this reader poll, please refresh your page.
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDIN 3 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2FtxTTG
