5 reasons the Cavaliers won't make the NBA Finals this year
shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
Yes, it’s only January 24. The playoffs are months away.
But it’s time to face facts: The Cleveland Cavaliers don’t look like a team that’s ready for a fourth straight year of challenging the Golden State Warriors.
They don’t even appear to be ready to win their own conference. Here are a few reasons why:
1. There’s too much locker room drama

(AP Photo/Eric Gay)
Poor Kevin Love. Even though he said everyone was a target in the now-infamous meeting, the reports said the forward was questioned about how legitimate his recent illness was. That’s unsettling to say the least — finger-pointing is never a good thing, particularly for a team that’s in a funk and needs to dig itself out.
2. The defense can’t stop anybody
Their 109.6 points allowed per game is the second-worst in the East, just 0.7 ppg fewer than what the Magic allows. Earlier this week, USA TODAY Sports took a deep dive into the numbers and found this:
The Cavs:
Have given up 893 transition points, which ranks 27th. They were 26th last season and 12th in 2015-16.
Are the worst team in the league when it comes to defending the roll man in pick-and-roll defense, allowing 1.22 points per possession.
Rank a middle-of-the-road 17th in isolation defense.
Rank 23rd in three-point defense and 25th in points allowed in the paint.
That’s awful, and part of the problem is the Cavaliers’ advanced age. It’s also a roster filled with players not known for prowess on the defensive end, save for Jae Crowder. Which brings us to …
3. There isn’t an easy fix to solve their woes
There’s serious talk about the Cavs’ acquiring guard George Hill from the Kings. It’s a good idea — he’s a solid backcourt defender. But is he really the name that will turn this team around enough to plow through fellow East contenders? Probably not. Acquiring DeAndre Jordan from the Los Angeles Clippers is similarly intriguing, but again, is that really a cure-all? It’s not. Plus, do the Cavs have enough trade chips to make a deal for him? Or for both defenders?
4. LeBron possibly leaving looms

David Richard-USA TODAY Sports
That’s where things get complicated. It’s not like James leaving is on the minds of his teammates when they’re on the court. But it hampers the way the franchise could save this situation. They could take that uber-valuable Brooklyn Nets pick they own and trade it for a big star to pair with James, but what’s the point in doing that if the MVP candidate packs up and leaves this summer? At the same time, the Cavs have to leave open the possibility that James might stay, so they might have to appease him by finding some help on the trade market. It’s NBA purgatory!
5. The Celtics are better
They’re younger, deeper, better coached and soooo much more effective on the defensive end (98.3 points allowed per contest). And what if Gordon Hayward makes a miraculous recovery and comes back later this year? Scary.
So, in summary …
