Readers sound off: Trust in police takes another hit
CLOSE

 The partner of a Minneapolis Police officer who fatally shot an Australian woman who called 911 spoke with investigators about Saturday's events. AP reporter Amy Forliti breaks down what police have shared so far. (July 19) AP

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 6 COMMENTEMAILMORE
A woman that a Minneapolis law enforcement officer killed in the alley behind her home died of a gunshot wound to the abdomen in a homicide. Justine Damond had called police to report a possible assault near the house. Comments are edited for clarity and grammar:
Another innocent person dies at the hands of an inexperienced, brutalizing police officer.
— Davian Q. Johnson
The Somali-American officer fired his gun across his partner and out of the car window. So when an officer of any ethnicity shoots a black person it’s violence, but when a black officer shoots and kills a white woman, silence.
— Kevin Price
And they weren't, implying carelessness or intention. Without evidence to exonerate, the officer MUST be prosecuted and convicted!
— Myschoolbus (@Myschoolbus) July 19, 2017
This story just adds to the fear towards police. People aren’t going to report serious crimes because they are afraid for their own safety. This police officer had three prior complaints against him and he’s only a rookie! Why was he not sanctioned and behind a desk until things were investigated? What were the other complaints? Body cameras were turned off, and dashboard camera did not capture the incident. This is so serious and terrifying. No more tragic than other police-involved shootings, but just as disturbing.
— John Smith
Damond was unarmed and had done nothing wrong. She fits all the criteria for a Black Lives Matter protest, except one. And the officer fits every criteria for BLM’s condemnation, except one.
— Kevin Caoimhin Smit
They should always be rolling. When are cops going to be held accountable for shooting innocent people. Why is killing their only choice.
— Coops (@niaecooper_nia) July 19, 2017
Any law enforcement officer who is so easily frightened by a loud noise (as officer Mohamed Noor claimed) that he fires his gun in response shouldn’t have been a cop in the first place.
Trust in police just took another hit, and this time it’s not the black community that is less trusting.
— Steve Evets
Doesn't do much good to supply cops with them if they aren't going to use them. Rogue cops
— MeganRenee652 (@meganrenee652) July 19, 2017
So now random loud sounds make cops “fear for their lives” and justify their shootings?
— Jeff Barr
So we are learning the shooting occured as, police attempted to exit vehicle coincident to fireworks...body cams are off while in vehicle
— RacerX (@slickvolt) July 19, 2017
All use of deadly force should be investigated by an outside agency and referred to the local grand jury.
— Rob Stelzer
To join the conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 6 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2vkCeU6
