Anthony Bourdain releases family-inspired cookbook
To say Anthony Bourdain has been around the block a few times would be putting it mildly. The chef, author and host of the award-winning CNN series Parts Unknown has tempted our palettes and taken us to obscure parts of the globe, sharing his many cultural adventures along the way. This month we get a glimpse of Bourdain’s favorite family-inspired recipes in Appetites, his first cookbook in a decade, available on October 25. Here, we chat with Bourdain about family, pancakes and his love of Italy.
Q: Appetites is your first cookbook in a decade. In that time, you have traveled the globe with your acclaimed TV shows and became a father. Why were you ready to write a cookbook at this juncture in your life?
A: I started this some time ago. I moved from cooking as a professional to cooking for a little girl over the last part of a decade. I thought it would be interesting and fun to kind of revisit a lot of the dishes that I grew up with, some of the dishes that seem to be working especially for my 8-year-old daughter and her friends. I thought it would be useful to take professional organizing skills to home cooking. My daughter will eat almost everything that's in the cookbook. It’s very much her taste; she is the boss of the house — if she doesn't like it, I am not cooking it.
Q: In the intro to Appetites you reference your daughter a lot, and how you enjoyed becoming a dad later in life (at 50). I heard you enjoy making pancakes for her? 
A: I am very much enjoying the fatherhood phase of my life. I used to love it when my father made pancakes for me. Cooking breakfast and brunch professionally really kind of ruined breakfast service for me for a long time. I am grateful to my daughter and her friends, especially when they have a sleepover party for making brunch fun again!
Q: When you are not traveling the globe, what is a typical evening of entertaining like at the Bourdain household?
A: Well, chances are my wife would not be there. She would be training in Jiu Jitsu at the gym. If I were entertaining it would be me, my daughter and her nanny from the Philippines, her son, who is basically my daughter’s closest friend. Maybe some other Filipinos — Tagalog is spoken very widely in my house — plus a couple of visiting Brazilians and maybe Eric Ripert — he drops by, my friends Helen and John come in and out, Doug from Big Gay Ice Cream and his boyfriend. So it may not be your typical family. I make meatloaf, mac and cheese, maybe roast beef. For my daughter’s birthday we will be having Yorkshire pudding. She likes foie gras strangely enough, but pretty simple.
Q: Where do you and the family like to eat when you’re not cooking?
A: If it’s the three of us, what we can all agree on is Korean barbecue in NYC. It’s 100% protein — no carbs. It’s good for fighters. My daughter loves it because you get to cook the food yourself.
Q: Your cookbook really focuses on celebrating your love of food, friends and family. Where would you travel with your family for the ultimate culinary experience?
A: I mean Italy is hard to beat. It’s a family-friendly experience, they like to see kids in restaurants, and at dinner you see all the adults at the table and all the kids at the other end of the table. Maybe they run off and go play. The Italian’s seem to have a better attitude with kids and the food is great! I like the South, Naples and the Amalfi Coast.
Q: From all your travels, which culture of food do you think is the most misunderstood?
A: Mexico. As Americans, we tend to look at Mexican food as nachos, which is not Mexican food really — they don't eat them. All of these concoctions that we think are Mexican, are in no way reflective of the deep, incredibly old, complex and sophisticated deep regional cuisine of Mexico. Or the new modern Mexican cuisine, which has really been exploding over the last few years. I think we just have a completely misrepresented view of how good, how complex these flavors are. I think we could learn a lot more. It’s a great cuisine that's really moving forward, faster than any other.
Q: What were a few powerful food memories that you had as a kid?
A: Look, getting bullied in school and coming home crying in the rain and my mom making me a can of Campbell’s Tomato Soup with some oysterettes. It was comfort food; that is what food should be.
CONNECTTWEET 6 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2eY68ZB
