5 things you need to know Monday
Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this story misidentified which states have new restrictions on driver's licenses.
Muslim civil rights group to file suit challenging Trump order
The Council on American-Islamic Relations said it would file a federal lawsuit Monday in the Eastern District of Virginia to challenge the constitutionality of an executive order by President Trump that temporarily bans immigration by citizens from seven Muslim-majority countries. The suit will charge that the order's underlying motive is to ban people of Islamic faith from entering the United States from Iraq, Syria, Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia and Yemen. Chaos reigned at U.S. airports across the country over the weekend, as authorities, travelers and lawyers struggled to understand how the ban was being implemented.
CLOSE

 Protests flared as President Trump's executive order blocked refugees from entering U.S. airports, including travelers who already had valid visas. USA TODAY NETWORK
Super Bowl week starts now
The most hyped seven days in all of sports kicks off Monday, bringing a week's worth of festivities ahead of Sunday's matchup between the Atlanta Falcons and the New England Patriots. Here's your guide to what's ahead. Monday's Opening Night will bring a media frenzy to Houston's Minute Maid Park as reporters have at the Falcons followed by the Patriots, who arrive in town today.

New restrictions on some state driver's licenses
As of Monday, residents of some states can't use their driver's licenses to gain access to federal agencies or nuclear power plants. The change comes as part of the Department of Homeland Security’s Real ID program, which requires states to adopt better security measures for driver’s licenses and other ID to discourage forgeries and prevent terrorism.

Expect a major upheaval in Monday's AP hoops poll
Last week, three of college basketball's top four teams in The AP Top 25 poll suffered losses by Wednesday. The hits to ranked teams kept coming, leading to what's sure to be a major upheaval in Monday's poll. One team stayed steady through the chaos: No. 3 Gonzaga, the only undefeated team in Division I. Should the Bulldogs top Monday's poll, it would be the second time in program history. Their first No. 1 ranking came in 2013.

NAACP leaders appear in court for protesting Trump pick
Six NAACP leaders plan to appear in court Monday after staging a sit-in this month at the office of Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions, President Trump's attorney general nominee. NAACP President Cornell William Brooks led the Jan. 3 protest demanding Sessions remove himself from the confirmation process because of past statements about race, police misconduct and the Voting Rights Act. Brooks and the five other leaders were arrested and charged with misdemeanor criminal trespass, requiring them to appear in court in Mobile.

And the essentials:
Weather: The national forecast calls for light snow in the Mid-Atlantic and the Northern Rockies, a "clipper" across the Upper Midwest, and a '"stellar" day across Texas and Oklahoma.
Stocks: Global shares fell Monday, rattled by weak data and uncertainty over the potential impact of President Trump’s travel ban.
TV Tonight: Here's what we're watching Monday.
Be inspired: Swimmer with MS swims one million yards.
You can subscribe to get the day's top news each weekday in your inbox.
Want to listen rather than read? Grab your headphones and check out our 5 Things podcast:
CONNECTTWEET 19 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2jMv3y0
