2017's best food and beverage books
Oregon chef Joshua McFadden has a way with vegetables. Excerpted from Six Seasons by Joshua McFadden (Artisan Books). Copyright © 2017. Photographs by Laura Dart and A.J. Meeker.
 The Grand Central Market Cookbook celebrates the Downtown Los Angeles market, which turns 100 this year. Reprinted from THE GRAND CENTRAL MARKET COOKBOOK by Adele Yellin and Kevin West. Copyright (c) 2017 by Grand Central Market. Photographs copyright (c) 2017 by Johnny Autry. Published by Clarkson Potter, an imprint of Penguin Random House, LLC.
 Every vendor contributed to the book's 80 recipes, such as these carnitas, so you can cook up nostalgia after a visit. Reprinted from THE GRAND CENTRAL MARKET COOKBOOK by Adele Yellin and Kevin West. Copyright (c) 2017 by Grand Central Market. Photographs copyright (c) 2017 by Johnny Autry. Published by Clarkson Potter, an imprint of Penguin Random House, LLC.
Last SlideNext Slide

With four-color photos and aspirational headnotes (why don’t I use excess vinaigrette to marinate some flank steak?), cookbooks make an excellent gift. They are equally suited to dear friends and relatives, or that mumbly fellow in accounting whom you drew for your office swap.
The most timely cookbook of 2017 is Feed the Resistance, Julia Turshen’s slim tome of affordable recipes and actionable strategies for socially conscious home cooks rocked by recent news cycles. Turshen surrounds herself with such culinary entrepreneurs and activists as Hawa Hassan and Bryant Terry, who provide recipes, commentary and community. Feed the Resistance marks Turshen’s second consecutive year on this list (her Simple Pleasures ranked among our top picks in 2016).
Six Seasons, by Oregon chef Joshua McFadden, revolutionizes such seemingly rote tropes as farm-to-table and plant-centric eating by redefining the culinary calendar from four to six seasons. Another Oregon chef, Bonnie Frumkin Morales, reinvigorates Russian flavors in Kachka, an elegant, energetic book named for her Portland, Ore., restaurant. The myriad, multicultural flavors that make Josef Centeno one of Los Angeles’ most exciting chefs are on full display in Baco, a collection of 130 recipes spanning showstopping mains and entire section devoted to condiments.
For home cooks focused on improving weeknight suppers and everyday affairs, books from three of the most brilliant and accessible authors also hit shelves this year. Former Bon Appetit staffer Alison Roman debuts Dining In, a beautiful collection of recipes perfect for casual parties or personal meals, all in Roman’s smart, funny voice. In Dinner: Changing the Game, New York Times columnist Melissa Clark offers more than 200 recipes that are both exciting and possible to execute without an advanced culinary degree. Smitten Kitchen Everyday, by the award-winning blogger Deb Perelman, spans such clever, crowd-pleasing recipes as two-ingredient oat brittle, leek-and-feta savory pie, and pretzel linzer cookies.
Those hoping to gain a more technical understanding of cooking will appreciate Salt Fat Acid Heat. Author and educator Samin Nosrat breaks down the basics of flavor and technique alongside infographics, illustrations and 100 recipes (with infinite variations).
Technique also headlines Bravetart, a remarkably fun book that breaks down Americana classics (Oreos, Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups) by Serious Eats columnist Stella Parks. Zingerman’s Bakehouse, another baking book, offers expertly executed guidelines to the Michigan institution’s classic brownies and sour cream coffee cake.
Whether your holiday shopping is wrapping up or just getting started, consider these books a helpful guide for those remaining on your list. Alternatively, you could go full 2017 — buy one for yourself and write it off as an investment in #selfcare.
Browse the photos above for these standout cookbooks and more, including famous restaurants' recipes revealed, and see more gift inspiration below.

 Baked NYC offers assortments of six brownies or eight cookies baked in New York City with nationwide shipping ($24). courtesy of Baked NYC
