Discount movie tickets? There are apps for that
Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this report misidentified Carmike Cinemas.
It's been a humdrum summer at the box office for anyone not named Dory or Tarzan.
But with the help of movie-ticketing apps such as the just-launched Atom Tickets, theater owners are hoping to get butts in seats, while also giving filmgoers bang for their buck. So what's the best ticket-buying alternative for you? USA TODAY breaks down the pros and cons of three smartphone apps, all available on iOS and Android:
Atom Tickets
Price: Free.
Availability: Select cities nationwide including Los Angeles, San Diego, Atlanta and Nashville. A nationwide expansion is planned later this summer.
How it works: Designed as a social network for moviegoing, Atom allows you to coordinate trips to the theater with your friends directly in the app. Once you create an account or sign up using Facebook, you can see which movies your friends would like to see, send invites, pick showtimes and buy tickets. You can also also skip long lines at the concession stand by pre-ordering snacks and drinks before arriving.
Pros: Your first Atom ticket is free. Atom is also exploring flexible pricing, meaning group tickets could be discounted several weeks into a movie's release, according to the Los Angeles Times.
Cons: Right now, Atom can only be used at AMC and Regal theaters.

Dealflicks
Price: Free.
Availability: More than 750 theaters nationwide.
How it works: Described as "Priceline for movie tickets," Dealflicks allows theater owners to pick which movies they would like to discount and at what price. Discounts (10% to 60%) vary by location and showtime, and are frequently combined with deals on concessions.
Pros: The user-friendly app lets you buy cheap tickets for most movies already in theaters, as well as pre-order discounted seats for upcoming films.
Cons: Although Dealflicks expanded into all Carmike Cinemas earlier this year, the chain is only in the suburbs of major markets such as Phoenix and San Diego. Most theaters also have a limited quantity of discounted tickets, available for only a handful of days and times each week.
MoviePass
Price: $30-$45 per month, depending on where you live.
Availability: More than 3,700 theaters nationwide.

How it works: Designed as the theater equivalent of Netflix, MoviePass allows you to see one movie every 24 hours. After signing up, subscribers receive a MoviePass debit card by mail. In order to see a movie, you need to be within 100 yards of your desired movie theater, which allows you to check in to your showtime of choice using the MoviePass app. Once you check in, your card is automatically loaded and can be used to "purchase" your ticket at the box office or kiosk.
Pros: Considering that movie tickets are $15 or more in large cities, the monthly fee pays for itself within two or three trips to the theater.
Cons: The complex process of buying a single ticket — and only when you're near a theater — can make getting tickets ahead of time a headache. You can't use the app to buy tickets for moviegoing companions, nor can you purchase them for 3-D or IMAX showings (although MoviePass is exploring premium packages, which would include movies in all formats at a higher price point).
CONNECTTWEET 52 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/29wSk6R
