50 states: 50 food capitals
Dothan, Ala., is called the Peanut Capital of the World for its largest agricultural export, and hosts the National Peanut Festival each November as the harvest concludes. courtesy of National Peanut Festival
 Yuma, Ariz., is the winter lettuce capital of North America. The city offers Field to Feast farm tours from January to March, in partnership with University of Arizona and Arizona Western College. See more information at visityuma.com. courtesy of Visit Yuma
 Arkansas' Searcy County is the Chocolate Roll Capital of the World, hosting a Chocolate Roll Festival in Marshall in March, which includes the World Champion Chocolate Roll Contest. Try one at the Kenda Drive-in concession stand in Marshall, Ark. courtesy of the Arkansas Department of Parks and Tourism
 Dove Creek, Colo., is known as the Pinto Bean Capital of the World. Adobe Milling bean has the trademark on special red and white pintos grown locally, called Anasazi Beans. Try the distinct flavor at Adobe Milling's headquarters, Dove Creek Sinclair or by ordering online. courtesy of the Dove Creek Chamber of Commerce
 In the Florida panhandle, Wewahitchka is the Tupelo Honey Capital of the World. The distinct taste of the rare, seasonal, raw honey is from Tupelo trees. Try Wewahitchka-based Smiley Honey by calling ahead and stopping by or ordering online at smileyhoney.com. Brian Bertonneau
 While Hawaii hasn't been a top pineapple producer in decades, the Dole Plantation is still a leading attraction in the state, and therefore Hawaii's pineapple capital. The Oahu property offers tours, gardens, a train ride, the world's largest maze, and of course pineapples for purchase. courtesy of Dole Plantation
 Chicago may be the deep dish (and arguably hot dog) capital, but Illinois is also home to the Hog Capital of the World: Kewanee, the country's top hog producer. Held every September, Hog Days includes "the World's Largest Outdoor Pork Barbecue". courtesy of Kewanee Hog Days
 Le Mars, Iowa is known as the Ice Cream Capital of the World, and is home to the Blue Bunny Ice Cream Parlor & Museum. The city has more than 50 ice cream sculptures to see. Bill Nellans, courtesy of the Iowa Tourism Office
 Wellington, Kansas is called the Wheat Capital of the World, and the Wellington Area Chamber of Commerce and Convention and Visitors Bureau organized a Sumner County Wheat Capital of the World Tour with 10 stops in 2012. Today, visitors can catch the Kansas Wheat Festival in July. Phil White, courtesy Wellington Area Chamber of Commerce/Convention and Visitors Bureau
 Reuters called Owensboro, Ky., the burgoo capital of the world in 2007, as the city is one of few places still serving the stew known for originating with mutton. Owensboro hosts the International Bar-B-Q Festival each May where visitors can try traditional burgoo (pictured) and mutton (Food Republic labeled the city the mutton capital of the world in 2012). Bryan Leazenby
 The Louisiana Legislature named Breaux Bridge, La., the Crawfish Capital of the World in 1959. Try the Cajun Country specialty at restaurants like Crazy About Crawfish or the Crawfish Festival with live music in May. courtesy of the St. Martin Parish Tourist Commission
 Crisfield, Md., is the Crab Capital of the World, on the Chesapeake Bay. Try Maryland blue crab at the National Hard Crab Derby each Labor Day, dine at waterfront crab houses, or go crabbing on the area's public piers. Clark Vandergrift, OTD
 Middleborough, Mass., is the Cranberry Capital of the World as the crop is its top industry and Ocean Spray Cranberries' headquarters is here. Visitors can see bogs or attend the Cranberry Harvest Celebration in nearby Wareham, Mass., over Columbus Day weekend. courtesy of The Town of Middleborough
 With more than 17 restaurants serving breaded pork tenderloin (particularly sandwiches), St. Joe, Mo., trademarked the Tenderloin Capital of the World title in March. Try it at Hi Ho Bar and Grill. Patrick P. Evenson, courtesy of St. Joseph Visitors Bureau and Hi Ho Bar and Grill
 Nevada isn't necessarily known for food capitals, but Las Vegas is undoubtedly the celebrity chef capital of the world with dozens of famous names lining the Strip. Dine at restaurants from Gordon Ramsay, Giada de Laurentiis, Nobu Matsuhisa, Thomas Keller, Guy Savoy and more stars, or catch many of them at the annual Vegas Uncork'd by Bon Appetit food festival in May. courtesy of Vegas Uncork'd
 New England's other maple capital (after Vermont), New Hampshire has more than 70 sugar houses. Visit Folsom's Sugar House in Chester, N.H., which has a shop full of local maple products, during Maple Month or Maple Weekend in March. New Hampshire Division of Travel & Tourism
 One of several destinations claiming to be the Blueberry Capital of the World, NJ.com says Hammonton, N.J., is more accurately the "fresh blueberry capital of the world." Taste the local specialty at DiMeo Farms, which offers "organic, Non-GMO, Heirloom blueberries" and "u-pick blueberries on [a] 100-year-old family blueberry farm and blueberry plants nursery." courtesy of DiMeo Farms
 Winston-Salem, N.C., is the Moravian Cookie capital with four makers on the city's historic culinary trail. Try the local specialty at Mrs. Hanes' Moravian Cookies in the suburb of Clemmons, N.C. The bakery has offered tours since 1990, and ships handmade cookies nationwide. J. Sinclair Photography, courtesy of Visit Winston-Salem
 Known as the Chili Capital of the World, Cincinnati has its own style of chili and hundreds of chili parlors. A few restaurants compete as the city's favorite maker, including Skyline Chili, where the signature “4-Way” equates to a plate of spaghetti covered with chili and beans, smothered with shredded cheddar cheese and served with a side of oyster crackers. A vegetarian version substitutes the meat chili with black beans and rice. Wendy Pramik, for USA TODAY
 Oregon's Greater Newport Chamber of Commerce trademarked the city as the The Dungeness Crab Capital of the World in 2007. Try some fresh off local boats in dishes such as Fishwives Stew with Dungeness crab legs at Local Ocean Seafood, a fish house and market. Harmony Elizabeth
 Actually a part of metro Augusta, Ga., Johnston, S.C., claims the Peach Capital of the World title as it produces more peaches than anywhere but California. Try the official state fruit at Sara's Fresh Market's three locations, which offer Titan Farms Peaches (the state's largest grower). courtesy of the Edgefield County Chamber of Commerce
 Known as a top pheasant-hunting destination, Aberdeen, S.D., is the country's pheasant sandwich capital. The community served pheasant sandwiches to troops passing through in the 1940s. Today, volunteers and CVB staff members carry on that legacy by making pheasant sandwiches for pheasant hunters visiting from out of state annually, and the city hosted its first Pheasant Sandwich Shootout culinary competition this year. Visit in the third week of October during the annual pheasant opener to taste the tradition. courtesy of Aberdeen Area Convention and Visitors Bureau
 Utah consumes so much JELL-O that the official state snack is celebrated for a week every year. Salt Lake City farm, garden and museum Thanksgiving Point hosts the Jigglefest JELL-O food fight and Utah Foods Cook-Off with a JELL-O category of competition in July. courtesy of Thanksgiving Point Institute
 Virginia is the self-proclaimed Oyster Capital of the East Coast, thanks to its seven oyster regions. The Eastern Shore hosts three regions, which are highlighted at more than 70 restaurants, raw bars and seafood shacks. Here, Oyster Farm Seafood Eatery at Kings Creek serves Rockefeller-style oysters in Cape Charles. Wendy Pramik, for USA TODAY
 Wisconsin is of course America's cheese capital, but it's also home to the Frozen Custard Capital of the World, Milwaukee, due to a high concentration of custard stands. Try it at the original, Gilles Frozen Custard, which opened in 1938. courtesy of Gilles Frozen Custard
Last SlideNext Slide

America is full of fun "capitals", from the "bicycle capital of the northwest" to the "weather capital of the world", and we found a place in each state that claims a food capital title. You can probably guess the potato capital and the cherry capital, but the homes of fruitcake, burgoo, and even ice cream, may surprise.
Of course, California is the king of food capitals, as a major agricultural destination. The state hosts the almond, broccoli, carrot, date, garlic, kiwi fruit, lima bean and raisin capitals. Four or five American cities vie for the strawberry capital title, and there are multiple chili and watermelon capitals.
Browse the photos above for a capital claim to fame in each state and where you can try each local specialty. Plus, see more from our 50 state series below.

 Alabama’s Red Clay Brewing Company makes three types of cider in Opelika. The Lakeside Mulberry and Lakeside Tangelo are served exclusively in the brewery’s taproom, which also serves pizzas topped with everything from pineapple to Andouille sausage. courtesy of Red Clay Brewing Company
 Alaska’s only cider bar, Double Shovel, uses Alaskan apples and berries (supplemented with syrups from Washington), to hand craft ciders served up in a cozy Anchorage tasting room, where local food trucks often line up to feed hungry cider imbibers. courtesy of Double Shovel
 A completely unique institution to Arizona, Prescott’s Superstition Meadery brews its own meads and ciders, serving the craft beverages in a taproom and in bottles worldwide. A flight of a dozen ciders and meads offers the most comprehensive tasting, to be paired with tapas and desserts off Superstition’s food menu. courtesy of Superstition Meadery
 Seven varieties of all-natural Arkansas cider are on tap at Black Apple Crossing, which includes live music, trivia and Taco Tuesdays in its mix of cider-fueled weekly events in Springdale. Ciders range from the Cider Gal, made from Gala apples, to the boozy 8% ABV Blackjack, infused with local blackberries. courtesy of Black Apple Crossing
 The California Cider Company’s Ace Cider Pub claims fame as the first cider pub in America. Nine ciders are on tap in Sebastopol, and tasting flights let visitors try every variety. Live music, darts and games keep guests entertained, and outdoor seating, where both dogs and picnics are welcome, completes the relaxed ambiance. courtesy of Sonoma County Tourism
 In Mystic, Conn., B.F. Clyde’s Cider Mill is the oldest steam-powered cider mill in the America, dating back to 1881. Visit for hard cider and apple wine tastings, accompanied by weekend cider making demonstrations led by the sixth generation of the Clyde family in the cider business. courtesy of the Connecticut Office of Tourism
 In Marydel, Del., Rebel Seed opens its tasting room daily and offers guided tours of its cider-making process on weekends. Expect dry, semi-dry and sweet ciders, all of which rebel just a little bit on what you expect a hard cider to taste like. courtesy of Rebel Seed
 In St. Petersburg, Fla., 3 Daughters Brewing has a cider bar and tasting room called The Orchard. Inside, a homemade semi-sweet apple cider and a Florida Key lime cider are on tap, along with guest ciders celebrating the region, like sweet tea, mimosa and dried apricot-flavored ciders. Leisa Rice
 Atlanta’s first hard apple cider maker, Urban Tree Cidery serves its original European-style cider, sweet Georgia-inspired cider and a barrel aged cider in its taproom, which has a BYO food policy and welcomes dogs on the patio. courtesy of Urban Tree Cidery
 Based in Oahu, Paradise Ciders is Hawaii’s first cider maker. The tropical fruit-infused ciders, like the Lei'd Back Lilikoi can be found on tap throughout the islands at bars including Maui Brewing Co. in Waikiki. courtesy of Hawaii Tourism United States
 Chicago’s first dedicated cider bar, The Northman has earned a loyal Illinoisan following since its opening in 2016. The extensive list of ciders on tap, from casks, and by the bottle and can is sourced from across America and Europe, and an in-house cider school teaches cider lovers how to better imbibe in apple beverages. Nick Murway
 Iowa’s The Cider House in Fairfield serves ciders from around the world as well as a house brand, Fishback & Stephenson, which produces 100 gallons a week of creations like the Iowa Strangler made with local organic berries. The Cider House is also an award-winning burger joint, serving humanely raised meat with a variety of toppings. Werner Elmker
 The only cider bar in Kentucky, Lexington’s Pivot Brewing serves a bevy of its own craft ciders on tap, reserving some taps for “guest ciders” to let drinkers try multiple cider styles. Apples are pressed fresh each harvest season, resulting in a steady rotation of unique ciders. Bevin Morgan
 New to New Orleans as of July, Louisiana’s Broad Street Cider & Ale crafts its own gluten-free, sugar-free ciders in the city. In the tap room, a variety of ciders flavored with unique strands of yeast are up for the tasting and weekend food pop-ups offer something to nosh on while you sip. courtesy of Broad Street Cider & Ale
 Portland, Maine’s Urban Farm Fermentory is about all things fermented and drinkable, from cider to beer, kombucha and mead. The taproom's 22 rotating taps offer ample opportunity to taste and compare unique ciders and learn more about the fermenting process. courtesy of Urban Farm Fermentory
 Boston’s Downeast Cider House infuses New England flare into its craft ciders – flavored with tart Cape Cod cranberries or berries from Maine. In addition to samples on tap and opportunities to fill growlers, Downeast offers weekend tours of its cidery, should you want a more interactive drinking experience. Cambria Grace Photography
 Established in 1946, Blake’s Family Farm is now a third generation-owned family business in Michigan, out of which Blake’s Hard Cider Co. stems. At the cider house in Armada, seasonal and limited-edition ciders ranging from 6% to more than 12% ABV, and flavored with everything from peppers to pumpkins, are served. Andrew Jowett
 Minneapolis’ Sociable Cider Werks opens its industrial taproom and patio to imbibers eager to drink a wide range of alcoholic apple products. Food trucks park outside to fuel drinkers as they taste their way through hopped and flavored ciders, as well as a unique beer-cider hybrid. Tours are offered each Saturday, and the taproom is closed on Tuesdays. courtesy of Sociable Cider Werks
 The cozy cabin that is Montana’s Lockhorn Cider House offers ample space to congregate at wooden benches under animal antlers, or outside by the fireplace to drink gluten-free, sulfite-free cider, accompanied by a gluten-free food menu. courtesy of Lockhorn Cider House
 Expect to taste completely unique ciders in the Ashland taproom of Nebraska’s Glacial Till. Small-batch ciders may be infused with cold brew or aged in bourbon barrels, while seasonal ciders range from pumpkin spice to a winter blend flavored with peppercorns and star anise. courtesy of Glacial Till Vineyard
 Reno, Nev.'s Piñon Bottle Co. is both a bottle shop and beer bar featuring 36 rotating taps and hundreds of bottles and cans for sale. Rare and craft ciders fall into the mix and can be tasted at the shop or taken home for a cozy hard cider night in. courtesy of Piñon Bottle Co.
 Nine taps of cider brewed in Santa Fe are served at New Mexico Hard Cider, along with plenty of Southwestern fare (like Frito Pies, also known as walking tacos), board games and picturesque orchard views. courtesy of New Mexico Hard Cider
 Upstate New York’s Finger Lakes Cider House, a rustic beacon of all things cider, sits just off the Cayuga Wine Trail. Guided tasting flights may be the best way to learn about distinct types of cider before ordering a pint and carrying it out to the porch. Hyper-local small bites and board games make it easy to spend an entire autumn day at this cider spot. courtesy of Finger Lakes Cider House
 In its four years of operation, Urban Orchard Cider Company has already produced 80 styles of cider, and counting, in Asheville, N.C. The family owned and operated company rotates through fruit-infused and hopped cider varieties to serve on tap at the cider house, all of which can be paired with dips, spreads, cheese and charcuterie from local purveyors. courtesy of Urban Orchard Cider Company
 New to North Dakota this month, Wild Terra is the state’s first urban cidery and cider bar. Homemade traditional and seasonal ciders are on tap as well as regionally and nationally sourced ciders intended to broaden the palates of Fargo’s cider drinkers. Brynn Joki
 Just a few miles from downtown Cleveland, Griffin Cider House keeps Ohio’s cider game strong. Founded by an English transplant who deemed the region’s lack of cider bars grim, this cider pub serves English-style craft ciders with a local twist, like the Honey Oak, which is flavored with four varieties of Ohio honey. Cody York
 Brand new to Pittsburgh, Threadbare Cider and Mead produces titular products with local and sustainable ingredients. Ciders and meads can be enjoyed in the tasty taproom, along with barrel-aged cocktails and pizza, beginning this month. courtesy of Threadbare Cider and Mead
 In Charleston, S.C., Ship’s Wheel Hard Cider doesn’t have a public taproom (yet), but the cidery recommends finding any of its three ciders on tap in the city, like at Charleston Beer Works or Neighborhood Tap House. courtesy of Ships Wheel Hard Cider
 The first craft cidery in Tennessee, Gypsy Circus uses fresh-pressed apple juice to create award-winning ciders in Kingsport. The taproom offers more than 20 types of cider, mead and beer on tap to drink outdoors in the rock garden, near the graffiti wall or on hammocks. courtesy of Gypsy Circus
 The light-drenched wood-paneled taproom at the magical Austin area-based Texas Keeper Cidery is pleasant enough to sit and sip in all day, but come evening, cheese plates, panini sandwiches and live music make this a legitimate all-night hangout in Manchaca. courtesy of Texas Keeper Cidery
 A certain animal mascot may be iconic to Vermont’s cider scene, but go hyper local at Burlington’s Citizen Cider, which serves its own craft ciders and rosé ciders sourced from local orchards, in a wood-paneled tasting room. courtesy of Citizen Cider
 With an expansive patio overlooking Virginia’s Blue Ridge Mountains, Bold Rock Hard Cider may be the most scenic place in America to drink cider. At the Nellysford Cidery, tours and tastings of craft ciders made from local apples are available daily. Jared Kay
 Select weekends offer the opportunity to tour and taste West Virginia’s Swilled Dog Hard Cider at the family-owned company’s production facility in Franklin, and it can regularly be found on tap across the state, in bars like Iron Horse Tavern in Morgantown. courtesy of Swilled Dog Hard Cider
 In Jackson Hole, Wyo., the picture-perfect Persephone Bakery offers a range of ciders to pair with its Instagrammable toasts and French baked goods. Options range from Sidra, imported from Spain, to Sidre, imported from France, and canned pear cider from Denver’s Infinite Monkey Theorem. courtesy of Persephone Bakery
Last SlideNext Slide

 In Alabama, barbecue is often smoked pork, but Leo and Susie’s Famous Green Top Bar-B-Q began smoking chicken at the request of a few customers, and the Smoked Chicken Sandwich was born. The eatery hickory smokes boneless, skinless chicken on indirect pits and serves it with pickles and homemade sauce — white, barbecue or both — on a burger bun. courtesy of Leo and Susie’s Famous Green Top Bar-B-Q
 The White Spot Cafe is one of the longest-running restaurants in Anchorage, Alaska, and it has been offering its now famous Halibut Sandwich for almost 30 years. A generous filet of halibut from nearby waters is lightly battered and deep fried to crispy perfection on the outside while the middle is moist and flaky. It’s served with cheese, tartar sauce, shredded lettuce, tomato and onion on a bun with a side of fries or coleslaw. Daryl Pederson
 From Chris Bianco, the owner of Arizona’s nationally renowned Pizzeria Bianco in Phoenix, Pane Bianco offers sandwiches on freshly baked focaccia bread that are then baked to order in a wood-fired oven. The Housemade Mozzarella features creamy mozzarella that’s made fresh daily, heirloom tomatoes, fresh basil and extra virgin olive oil. This sandwich is truly a testament to the power of fresh, homemade ingredients. courtesy of Pane Bianco
 A lunchbox favorite, the bologna sandwich is a classic and Johnny B’s Grill in El Dorado, Ark., makes one of the best in the country. With a second location that opened last year in Texarkana, the family-owned restaurants bring comfort food to both communities. The fried bologna sandwich, ringing in at just $2.29, comes with two slices of fried bologna, shredded lettuce, tomato and mayo, with pickle slices on the side. courtesy of Murphy Arts District
 Genoa salami, prosciutto, mortadella, coppacola, ham and provolone cheese layered inside a crusty slab of Italian bread make up Bay Cities Italian Deli’s venerated The Godmother sandwich in Santa Monica, Calif. Mayo, mustard, Italian dressing, onions, pickles, tomatoes, lettuce and a chopped pepper blend can all be added — and probably should be. Just say you want “the works.” Jennifer Lee
 Family-owned Snarf’s Sandwiches opened its first location in Boulder, Colo. in 1996 and has grown to more than 20 restaurants in Boulder, Denver and around the country. A favorite since day one, the Meatball Parmesan is a thing of beauty: pork and beef meatballs are smothered with marinara sauce and provolone and Swiss cheeses, sprinkled with Parmesan and Italian seasoning, and served on oven-toasted white or wheat bread. To add a little kick, ask for the giardiniera peppers, which are so popular they’re sold by the jarful. courtesy of Snarf’s Sandwiches
 In Clinton, Conn., Lobster Landing makes the premier example of a Connecticut-style lobster roll: a quarter pound of fresh lobster meat is loaded onto a toasted grinder roll from Koffee Kup Bakery in Vermont, then hit with a squeeze of fresh lemon and drizzled in melted salted butter from Cabot Creamery. The charming seaside building is more than 100 years old and is now the epitome of a New England lobster shack. Rachel Steponkus
 Back in 1976, Capriotti’s founders sought to create a sandwich for “real turkey lovers,” so they started roasting whole fresh turkeys overnight (a tradition Capriotti’s still upholds) and combined it with cranberries, homemade stuffing and a hint of mayo on a freshly baked roll, effectively making everyday Thanksgiving. The original Capriotti’s is in Wilmington, Del., and today there are more than 100 locations across the USA. courtesy of Capriotti’s
 Choosing the best Cuban sandwich in Florida is a little like trying to find the best gelato in Italy — all of the options are pretty good. There’s a lot to choose from, but we’re big fans of the Cuban from Columbia Restaurant in Tampa — and we’re not the only ones. Founded in 1905 by Cuban immigrant Casimiro Hernandez, Sr., the landmark eatery still uses his original 1915 recipe for the sandwich. Ingredients are important, and Columbia carefully layers ham, roast pork that is marinated in-house with garlic and sour orange, Genoa salami imported from Italy, Swiss cheese and dill pickles between local La Segunda Central Bakery Cuban bread before pressing to perfection. courtesy of Columbia Restaurant
 In Atlanta, the Shrimp Po’boy at Star Provisions is so popular that the team opened a fast-casual restaurant called W.H. Stiles Fish Camp based on its success. The sandwich consists of a buttered and griddled soft pain de mie roll that’s slathered in spicy homemade mayonnaise and filled with Kosher dill pickle chips, sliced tomato, and six large Gulf or Georgia white shrimp that are dipped in buttermilk and dredged in seasoned flour before being fried to crispy perfection. Tree Bird Branding
 In Hawaii, the word “kalua” refers to a cooking method using an imu, or underground oven. Not surprisingly, pork is a favorite protein to be roasted this way and of course makes a perfect sandwich filling. Highway Inn, which has a few locations in and around Honolulu, serves this pork in the form of sliders with a taro (starchy purple root vegetable) roll, bell peppers, onions and a spicy Hawaiian chili aioli. courtesy of Highway Inn
 You may be surprised to know that Idaho makes a solid Philly Cheesesteak. And Best Sandwich Shack puts a unique spin on it with the Yoshi. Born from a friendly competition with a neighboring sandwich shop, the Yoshi adds pepperoni and sausage to the traditional cheesesteak recipe of thinly sliced sirloin steak that’s topped with provolone cheese — and in this creative version — ranch dressing. courtesy of Best Sandwich Shack
 A torta is a Mexican sandwich served on a crusty roll and filled with a variety of piquant combinations. At Xoco in Chicago, celebrated chef/owner Rick Bayless fills the Pepito​ torta with juicy braised Creekstone short ribs, a heap of caramelized onions, gooey jack cheese, black beans and pickled jalapeños for just the right amount of kick​. courtesy of Xoco
 After a decade in Indianapolis, Goose the Market is always busy. The Batali Sandwich, named after you know who, is the only constant in a rotating daily menu of five or six sandwiches. Packed with a rainbow of Italian meats including coppa, soppressata and capocolla as well as provolone cheese, romaine lettuce, house marinated red onions and spicy giardiniera pickles that are smothered in mayonnaise and tomato preserves, this spicy sandwich is definitely a crowd pleaser. Kelley Jordan Heneveld, courtesy of VisitIndy.com
 Iowa is famous for its loose meat sandwiches, which were invented here in 1926 by butcher Fred Angell. Often confused with a Sloppy Joe (which is way more saucy), Angell’s creation consists of ground beef seasoned with a select (and secret!) blend of spices served on a hamburger bun. It can be topped with melted cheese, ketchup, mustard, onions and/or pickles. Angell started the Maid-Rite franchise, with locations across Iowa and the Midwest, which all serve the loose meat sandwich known as the Original Maid-Rite. courtesy of Maid-Rite
 Joe’s Kansas City BBQ is renowned for its smoky barbecue and the Z-Man sandwich. Named after a local radio personality, the sandwich uses the joint’s excellent sliced smoked brisket and tops it with smoked provolone cheese, a couple of onion rings and a bit of barbecue sauce on a Kaiser roll. David D. Morris
 One can’t think of sandwiches in Kentucky without the Hot Brown coming to mind. At The Brown Hotel in Louisville in 1926, Fred K. Schmidt invented the open-faced sandwich of turkey, tomatoes and bacon to serve late-night revelers. It’s covered in Mornay sauce, sprinkled with Parmesan cheese and broiled until the top is gooey and the bread is crispy. Variations are offered all over the state and beyond, but you can still get the original at The Brown Hotel. Wendy Pramik, for USA TODAY
 Po’ boys in New Orleans and Louisiana are a dime a dozen, but that doesn’t mean they’re all good. It’s hard to choose a favorite, but you can’t miss the fried oyster po’ boy from Domilise’s, a restaurant and bar founded in 1918 inside a small yellow house in the residential Uptown neighborhood — you’ll know it by the long line out the front door. The family-run restaurant’s fried oyster po’ boy is a masterpiece with large hunks of breaded, fried oysters that are dressed with lettuce, tomatoes, pickles, mayo and hot sauce. Devorah Lev-Tov
 Tuna melts, while a diner standard, can be pretty lackluster. Not so at Maine’s Palace Diner. The Biddeford eatery’s Tuna Melt comes on griddled Challah bread with mayo, an iceberg lettuce steak, house-made bread-and-butter pickles and tuna salad composed of red onion, celery, cucumber, fresh herbs, mayo and mustard. It’s topped with cheddar cheese that’s melted to perfection. Greta Rybus
 Yes, Maryland is famous for its crab cakes, and chef Chad Gauss takes it the next level at The Food Market in Baltimore’s Hampden neighborhood. His signature Club Sandwich is bursting with shrimp salad, a crab cake and the customary bacon, lettuce and tomato. Amy Langrehr
 In Waltham, Mass., Domenic’s Italian Bakery & Deli dates back 30 years. Run by a third-generation baker and butcher/salumiere, the eatery bakes ciabatta bread every morning and tops it with high-quality ingredients including imported Italian meats and cheeses, and fresh vegetables. The Parma, with imported black label Parma Prosciutto, basil-marinated tomatoes and fresh mozzarella, is pretty unbeatable. Devorah Lev-Tov
 Ann Arbor’s Zingerman’s gets a lot of the sandwich love in Michigan, but we’re showcasing Detroit’s Mudgie’s Deli for its Barrett sandwich. Made with Sy Ginsberg corned beef (a local favorite), creamy coleslaw, Swiss cheese and Thousand Island dressing piled onto an onion roll, this warm sandwich is a pretty great version of a Reuben. Devorah Lev-Tov
 A food truck and restaurant in Minneapolis, Hola Arepa serves Venezuelan sandwiches, also known as arepas. These are handmade daily from a cornmeal dough and formed into patties that are cooked on a griddle, split open and stuffed with a variety of Latin fillings. The Shredded Beef and Plantain Arepa is filled with fried sweet plantains, shredded beef, black beans, Hola sauce (a sweet and tangy herb sauce), Cotija cheese and pickled red onions. courtesy of Hola Arepa
 An institution in Jackson, Miss., Big Apple Inn was started by Juan “Big John” Mora. He created the Pig Ear Sandwich early on, when he received a bunch of pig ears from a local butcher who was throwing them away. The restaurant is now run by his great-grandson, Geno Lee, who still makes pig ear sandwiches. Not for the faint of heart, the pressure-cooked pig ears are cut into thirds and covered in mustard sauce, slaw and hot sauce, then sandwiched between a griddled bun. Can’t stomach it? Ask for a “smoke” (that’s sausage) sandwich instead. courtesy of Big Apple Inn
 For a century, Gioia’s Deli has been a fixture in St. Louis, garnering a James Beard Classics Award in 2017. The signature Hot Salami sandwich — hot in temperature, not spice — has been a staple and bestseller for years. It’s a secret blend of pork, head meat and seasoning that’s formed into a sausage and sliced hot to order. It’s served on local Italian bread, topped with the customer’s choice of garnish and St. Louis’ beloved Provel cheese. courtesy of Gioia’s Deli
 In Butte, Mont., Pork Chop John’s is home to John’s Original Pork Chop Sandwich. Three-and-a-half ounces of lean pork sirloin is lightly breaded, battered and deep-fried to make a juicy, tender but crispy pork chop. John's Original is placed on a bun and garnished with mustard, pickle and onion, while John’s Deluxe is served with mustard, pickle, onion, mayonnaise, lettuce and tomato. courtesy of Pork Chop John’s
 Did you know that Nebraska stakes a claim to the invention of the Reuben? Charles Schimmel, the owner of the Blackstone Hotel in Omaha, is said to have created it with his poker buddies (one of whom was named Reuben) one night. The celebrated Blackstone Reuben from Crescent Moon, across the street from the old hotel, pays homage to the original. Made with locally sourced corned beef from Omaha Steaks, locally baked marble rye from Rotella’s Bakery, Swiss cheese, sauerkraut, Thousand Island dressing and a combination of secret spices, the Reuben has been on the menu for more than 21 years. Sarah Miller
 Nevada’s Deli Towne USA is a gas station deli in Reno that calls itself the “Home of the Monster Sandwich,” as in huge sandwiches. The Italian is loaded with provolone cheese, lean ham, salami and Cappicola, that’s smothered in mayonnaise, mustard, olives, pepperoncini, lettuce, tomato, purple onion, oil, vinegar, salt, pepper and oregano, all on a garlic Swiss rosemary roll. It’s got a lot of flavor and a ton of textures thanks to the plethora of ingredients. courtesy of Deli Towne USA
 While a sandwich called The Dumpster may not sound appetizing, Sandwich Master in Rindge,N.H., makes it so. The ultimate hangover food, The Dumpster has chicken fingers, deep-fried mozzarella sticks and fried battered onion rings topped with mozzarella cheese and marinara sauce and stuffed into a grilled sub roll. Over the top? Sure. Delicious? Definitely. courtesy of Sandwich Master
 The New Jersey Sloppy Joe is entirely different than the saucy, ground-meat Sloppy Joe of 1980s dinners. In North Jersey, Sloppy Joe means a double decker cold deli sandwich and the Millburn Deli makes some good ones. Try the Corned Beef and Roast Beef Sloppy Joe, made with house-roasted beef, homemade coleslaw, Russian dressing and Swiss cheese on three slices of rye bread. courtesy of Millburn Deli
 In New Mexico, Bocadillos calls itself a slow-roasted sandwich shop, specializing in slow-roasted meats. The Albuquerque eatery makes the 505 Filthy with slow-roasted chicken breast, thick-cut bacon, New Mexico green chile, Asadero cheese, lettuce, tomato and house-made chipotle mayo. courtesy of Bocadillos
 New York takes its sandwiches seriously, so choosing just one is hard. While the city is known for its meaty deli creations, some of its vegetarian inventions are so unique and tasty that even meat lovers order them regularly. Case in point is Sub No. 7’s Broccoli Classic. The broccoli is roasted until charred on the edges and paired with pickled lychees, called muchim, a Korean type of pickling that uses chiles, ginger, garlic and sesame. To assemble, Sir Kensington's Fabanaise is spread on Italian bread from Brooklyn’s Caputo’s and the broccoli and lychees are topped with feta cheese and fried shallots. The combination of bitter, sweet, sour, salty and crunch is unbeatable. courtesy of Sub No. 7
 Is it wrong to choose a fried chicken sandwich from a barbecue joint? Not when it’s the fried chicken sandwich at Buxton Hall in Asheville, N.C. The chicken (all natural, free-range, sustainably raised chicken from Joyce Farms in Winston-Salem, N.C.) in the Original Buttermilk Fried Chicken Sandwich is smoked along with the restaurant’s whole hog so you get that smoky barbecue flavor. Then it’s dipped in buttermilk and deep-fried, topped with American cheese, pimento cheese, white barbecue sauce, and bread-and-butter pickles, and served on a toasted bun. courtesy of Buxton Hall Barbecue
 With locations in North Dakota’s biggest college towns, Grand Forks and Fargo, Red Pepper has been a state landmark since the 1960s, serving up fresh-made grinder sandwiches that live up to their reputation of being “down right addictive.” The Everything Grinder has your choice of ham, salami or turkey with Swiss cheese, shredded Colby cheese, taco meat (lean ground beef), white sauce and hot sauce. courtesy of Red Pepper
 Cleveland’s strong Eastern European roots led to its most known sandwich: the Polish Boy. It’s a grilled or deep-fried kielbasa in a bun, covered with French fries and coleslaw, and drizzled in barbecue or hot sauce. Try one at Seti’s Polish Boys, a popular food truck. courtesy of ThisIsCleveland.com
 Oklahomans love their chicken fried steak (tenderized steak that’s battered and deep fried) and it’s no surprise that it comes in sandwich form. In Tulsa, Tally’s Good Food Café is known for its Chicken Fried Steak Sandwich, a huge slab of chicken fried steak on a fresh bun with lettuce, tomato and mayo, and a side of white gravy. courtesy of Tally's Good Food Cafe
 In Portland, Ore., Lardo is a food cart turned sandwich shop that proudly celebrates its excesses. The Cold Fried Chicken is a menu staple that consists of fried chicken, bacon, blue cheese, pickles, bibb lettuce and Crystal hot sauce, and is served, you guessed it, cold. Alan Weiner Photography
 No, it’s not a Philly Cheesesteak. Instead, we’re highlighting Philadelphia’s Roast Pork Sandwich from Tommy DiNic’s for Pennsylvania. Hear us out. The succulent roast pork with broccoli rabe and sharp provolone served on a seeded roll and doused in meat juice hits all the right sandwich flavor and texture notes. Trust us, you haven’t lived until you’ve tried this sandwich, which was declared the best sandwich in the country on the Travel Channel show ‘America’s Best Sandwich’. Devorah Lev-Tov
 In Providence, R.I., The Godzilla from Geoff’s Superlative Sandwiches features a hefty amount of corned beef, muenster cheese, spinach, mushrooms, onions, tomatoes and Dragon’s Breath — also known as chili pepper. The blend of meaty, creamy, veggie goodness has a hint of spice. courtesy of GoProvidence.com
 Started by two brothers in Charleston, S.C., Smoke BBQ opened in 2015 to much acclaim. The focus on locally sourced and handcrafted items translates into stellar food like the Beef & Chedda sandwich. A crunchy bun is loaded with all-natural “True Texas” brisket, house-pickled jalapeños and melted cheddar cheese. courtesy of Smoke BBQ
 Housed in the 1915 building that once served as Rapid City’s first firehouse, Firehouse Brewing Company is South Dakota’s first brewpub. The Battalion Brisket sandwich overflows with beef brisket and barbecued onions. Add the Beer-BQ sauce, which is made with house-crafted stout brew. courtesy of Firehouse Brewing Company
 In Nashville, Tenn., Hattie B’s is famous for its Nashville hot chicken served with increasing levels of heat (including “hot,” “damn hot” and “shut the cluck up!!!”). Getting it on a sandwich with coleslaw, Nashville Comeback Sauce (mayonnaise, honey and a signature spice blend) and a Kosher pickle is the pro move. Joseph Woodley
 Barbecue is king in Texas but Noble Sandwich Co. in Austin makes a great argument for something a little different: a Duck Pastrami sandwich. “Having worked in fine dining restaurants, and really enjoying duck prosciutto, we decided to try and create a great pastrami sandwich with the wonderful flavors of duck,” says chef John Bates. He ultimately decided to smoke the whole duck, then slice it thin, pile high on toasted rye bread, smother in Russian dressing and top with house-made rye pickles. Order it “Reuben style” to add sauerkraut and Swiss. courtesy of Noble Sandwich Co.
 At Lola’s Street Kitchen, a roving food truck in Heber City, Utah, the menu of organic artisan sandwiches changes often. Follow along on Facebook to see the location and the menu, and look for the Salmon Ginger, featuring grilled wild sockeye salmon, cilantro cream sauce, ancho chile paste, and pickled cucumbers and ginger. courtesy of Lola's Street Kitchen
 Vermont favorite Noonie’s Deli is homey and comfortable, and serves some of the state’s best sandwiches in Middlebury. Go for the Vermonter, made with black forest ham, freshly sliced local apples and melted cheddar cheese on homemade honey oat bread that’s smeared with homemade Dijon honey mustard. It’s crunchy, gooey, soft and hot — a perfect mix of textures. Lacey Zalubski
 Earl’s Sandwiches now has three locations in Northern Virginia, after opening in Arlington in 2005 with a commitment to roasting meats in house. The Pork and Fries sandwich is a work of art: roasted pork loin, chipotle mayonnaise, crispy French fries, roasted red peppers, sweet pickle chips and chopped onions are all crammed onto a grilled ciabatta for a flavorful and textural explosion. Rey Lopez
 Washington is home to countless delis serving cheap banh mi, the Vietnamese sandwich made with chiles, cilantro, cucumber, pickles, mayo and some kind of protein like tofu or pork. Seattle Deli makes one of the state’s best: Barbecue Pork Banh Mi, which is served on a crunchy roll coated with mayo and filled with tender barbecue pork, loads of crunchy cukes, and pickled carrots and radish, then garnished with bright cilantro and slivers of fresh jalapeños. courtesy of Seattle Deli
 In West Virginia, Cam’s Ham was founded in the 1950s in Huntington, and soon became known for Cam’s Original Sugar Flaked Ham Sandwich. It’s a generous portion of sugar-flaked ham garnished with house special sweet sauce and crispy iceberg lettuce, all piled high on a toasted Grecian bun. courtesy of Cam's Ham
 Cheese is often synonymous with Wisconsin, so a grilled cheese sandwich seems like a must for this state. Madison's Alchemy Café makes a hearty version, called the Stuffed Grilled Cheese. Roasted broccoli, carrots, red onion and tomato are smothered in melted Wisconsin Swiss and cheddar cheeses, and a cilantro pesto sauce is spread on toasted sourdough bread for the perfect ooey-gooey concoction. Jentri Colello
 What would the Cowboy State of Wyoming be without some hearty beef? In Cheyenne, the 75-year-old Albany Restaurant is home to the Prime Rib Sandwich. The bestselling menu item features slow roasted prime rib that’s served on an open-faced roll with a cup of au jus. courtesy of The Wyoming Office of Tourism
