'They're shocked!' Obama mocks GOP establishment for handling of Trump
President Obama has made little effort to conceal his disdain for GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump's anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim rhetoric. But at a speech to Democrats in Austin, Tex. Friday, he pointedly blamed establishment Republicans for creating the environment that led to Trump's rise.
In remarks as sharply critical as he's ever been about the state of the 2016 GOP presidential race, Obama called the GOP presidential debate a combination of "fantasy, and school yard taunts, and sellin' stuff like it's the Home Shopping Network."
Obama called Trump "a distillation of what has been going on in their party for more than a decade," saying comparing establishment Republicans to Captain Louis Renault from the movie Casablanca.
"We're shocked someone is fanning anti-immigrant or anti-Muslim sentiment!" he said. "We're shocked! We're shocked that someone could be loose with the facts. Or distort someone's record. Shocked!
 "How could you be shocked? This was the guy who was sure I was born in Kenya. And wasn't letting go," he said. "As long as it was being directed at me they were fine with it. It was a hoot — and suddenly they're shocked! That gambling's going on in this establishment," he said.
Obama said the GOP message during his presidency is to "deny the evidence of science" or to accuse the other side of treason.
"Look it up, that's what they've been saying. So they can't be surprised when somebody says, 'I can make up stuff better than that," he said.
The remarks at a Democratic National Committee event at Austin Music Hall came the day after Obama rebutted arguments that he was partly to blame for the Republican party "crackup."

Earlier, at a technology event at South by Southwest Interactive Festival, Obama reclaimed an Internet hashtag meme critical of his presidency.
"Unemployment is now below 5%, and we avoided a Great Depression," he said. "Thanks, Obama."




Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1pllMiV
