Gymnasts detail alleged physical horrors at hands of former coach John Geddert
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: USA TODAY Sports' Nancy Armour believes the court system served justice with Nassar's sentencing of up to 175 years in prison, however, there are many lessons still needed to be learned from this nightmare of a story. USA TODAY Sports

Shortly after Larry Nassar's sentencing Wednesday, a former Olympic gymnast spoke about alleged abuses she had suffered at the hands of a coach, John Geddert.
Geddert, a longtime friend of Nassar's, was suspended by USA Gymnastics earlier this week and Tuesday sent a letter to his clients at Twistars Gymnastics that he was retiring.
Lindsey Lemke, who trained under Geddert before joining the team at Michigan State, said Geddert should follow Nassar to prison.
"He was abusive," Lemke said of the coach who led the 2012 U.S. Olympic women's team. "He deserves to be in jail with Larry."
In a news conference in Lansing, Mich., Lemke detailed the relationship between Nassar — the sexual predator — and Geddert — who many of Nassar's victims have said used physical abuse to motivate. They suggested Geddert's alleged physical abuse pushed them to Nassar for treatment. 
According to ESPN, first to report this story, Geddert has been investigated for physical assault on two occasions.
During Nassar's sentencing, some women said after Geddert allegedly abused them during training, Nassar would swoop in to provide treatment and build trust.
"(Geddert's) abuse was your fuel," Bailey Lorencen said to Nassar. "You used his abuse to mask your own pathetic pleasure."
Lorencen shared a story from training at Twistars in which she broke a bone in her back, but said Geddert picked her off the floor and made her continue practicing. Lorencen said a doctor later told her it was "a miracle" she wasn't paralyzed.
Makayla Thrush, a former Twistars gymnast, said her budding career was ended at the hands of Geddert, who she said pushed her so hard into a training apparatus, she suffered torn stomach muscles.
"You told me to kill myself not just once, but many other times," Thrush said. "After you ended my career, I tried."
