Start your year off right with these delicious crock pot dinners
It's the start of a new year, and you're ready to start keeping that resolution to have more family dinners together in 2018. But while your mindset and the year on the calendar has changed, your busy schedule hasn't. The solution? Arming yourself with a few quick and easy crock pot recipes that’ll be ready just in time for dinner time. Kind of like having your own personal chef.
As if making crock pot meals couldn’t get any easier, all the ingredients you need for your crock pot recipe can be put together for you when you shop at Publix. Your own shopper and personal chef? Sounds like 2018 is going to be your year. Here are a few easy-to-make crock pot recipes that will make your family eager to gather around the dinner table this year.
1. Creole Pork with Red Beans

You’ve never had ribs like this before. For a rib dish with all of the flavor and none of the mess, prepare a rack of boneless, country-style pork ribs in your crock pot along with a few easy to prepare veggies, and you’ve got a well-balanced rib recipe that melts in your mouth. Serve with fresh cornbread from Publix to complete this authentic Creole meal.
2. Slow Cooker Coconut Chicken Wild Rice Stew

If chicken soup has become a staple in your house, this inventive variation on the classic dish is sure to be a crowd pleaser. Adding red curry and fish sauce gives this stew a tasty twist, balanced out perfectly with the sweetness of brown sugar and coconut milk. A bonus for new chefs: chicken can easily be overcooked, but when you’re preparing it in a crock pot it’s virtually foolproof.
3. Italian Sausage and Peppers Pasta

This recipe combines two signature Italian dishes into one incredibly easy-to-prepare meal. Cook this traditional sausage and peppers recipe in your slow cooker, then whip up a quick batch of pasta to serve with it. Pair it with a quick Caesar salad, and you’ve got a dinner that’s Italian restaurant-worthy.
4. Slow Cooker Pork Carnitas

Taco night just got a whole lot easier. There are just seven ingredients in these pork carnitas, but you’d never know that from the delicious, flavorful results. To make taco night even more fun, set up a DIY station with toppings like salsa, guacamole, lettuce, sour cream and anything else you love to top your taco with!
5. Mediterranean Beef Roast with Pasta

A new take on traditional pot roast, the Mediterranean flavors in this dish add extra zest – from sundried tomatoes to Kalamata olives. Serving beef roast over whole wheat pasta makes for a health-friendly meal that requires minimal prep work. Serve with a Publix ready-made side salad to add an extra helping of veggies to your dinner.
6. Hearty Slow Cooker Chili

Chili season is in full swing. This super simple chili recipe calls for ingredients that you likely already have in your pantry. Add a few fresh sausages, beef and chopped onions, and you’ve got what you need for this set-it-and-forget-it meal sure to be remembered as a family favorite.
7. Slow Cooker Chicken and Potato Korma

This customary Indian dish is typically labor intensive – but not when you’re using a slow cooker! Mix the finished recipe with yogurt, cilantro and lime juice to eliminate the chance of curdling. For a meal with less kick, opt out of using red pepper flakes.
The recipe for keeping your New Year’s resolution to spend more time with family? It’s as easy as putting new dishes on the table that you all can enjoy together. Try these easy-to-make crock pot meals for a delicious start of the new year. Stop by your local Publix to get started tonight!

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2EoUjV6
