OnPolitics Today: Mr. Mueller, the president will speak with you now
332 Shares 




CLOSE

 President Donald Trump says he's "looking forward" to being interviewed by special counsel Robert Mueller. Speaking to reporters Wednesday, Trump says he'd be willing to answer questions under oath. (Jan. 24) AP
President Trump's ready for Mueller. 
The president publicly stated he's not only willing to chat under oath with special counsel Robert Mueller but is "looking forward to it, actually." 
Huh: Trump declined to commit to such an interview just two weeks ago, calling it "unlikely." It's the first hint from Trump that he'll take part in the interview over whether his campaign colluded with Russia — and whether Trump obstructed justice.
The interview could be what USA TODAY's Washington team calls "a legal minefield" for the president.
“There has been no collusion whatsoever, there has been no obstruction whatsoever," Trump told reporters today from the West Wing.
Also on Wednesday: Trump said a path to citizenship for DREAMers is "going to happen." Guy's full of surprises.
 This is OnPolitics Today. Subscribe here. 
Trump wants citizenship for DREAMers 'at some point in the future'
Trump is expected to roll out a new immigration plan next week, but said that a way to citizenship for young people brought into the country illegally must happen first. “We’re going to morph into it ... It’s going to happen, at some point in the future, over a period of 10 to 12 years," Trump told reporters, saying his team would do a "great job" with DACA, the program protecting about 800,000 such immigrants. As ever, though, he still wants that wall: "If you don’t have a wall, you don’t have DACA."
Meanwhile, Trump's attorney general is threatening 23 "sanctuary cities," including New York, Chicago and Los Angeles, if they don't fork over info on local prisoners' immigration statuses. 
'Secret' House memo: shocking abuse or a distraction from Trump's Russia woes 🤔
House Republicans say a secret memo reveals "shocking" spying abuses by the FBI and Justice Department. House Democrats say it's a distraction, backed by the Russian government, to draw attention from the Russia inquiries slowly closing in on Trump. Any House member was welcomed to view the memo, prepared by GOP staffers for Rep. Devin Nunes, which Republicans called shocking — but also classified. Rep. Adam Schiff, a Democrat, said the memo is "a profoundly misleading set of talking points" meant to discredit the FBI, whom Trump suggested once spied on him.
Republican lawmaker denies harassing staffer he called his 'soul mate'
"I have an affection for her, but I clarified that I was a happily married man, that I was not looking for any kind of a relationship." That's what Rep. Patrick Meehan of Pennsylvania told WHYY as he faces accusations that he sexually harassed a staffer and used taxpayer money to pay her a settlement. Meehan stepped down from the House Ethics Committee as it reviews the allegations against him. Meehan's aides released text messages showing he invited the woman out for ice cream after a town hall.
