Saints’ Marshon Lattimore and Alvin Kamara up for NFL Rookie of the Year
44 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
The NFL announced its list of players nominated for the Pepsi NFL Rookie of the Year award, and to no one’s surprise the New Orleans Saints dynamic pair of freshmen stars made the cut in cornerback Marshon Lattimore and running back Alvin Kamara. Joining Lattimore and Kamara are Jacksonville Jaguars running back Leonard Fournette, Kansas City Chiefs running back Kareem Hunt and Carolina Panthers running back Christian McCaffrey.
 2️⃣ #Saints are up for @NFL Rookie of the Year.
 Vote now for @A_kamara6
and @shonrp2!
 🗳: https://t.co/628xhMeIuH pic.twitter.com/IhIvCr7Geq
 — New Orleans Saints (@Saints) January 23, 2018
Lattimore and Kamara are no strangers to receiving honors after both turned in blistering rookie performances. The two standouts they took home the NFL Rookie of the Week award a whopping 11 out of a possible 17 times during the regular season. Lattimore was named by the AP as the Defensive Rookie of Year, and Kamara as Co-Offensive Rookie of the Year alongside Chiefs’ RB Kareem Hunt. The Pro Football Writers of America also placed them on their All-Rookie and All-NFC teams.
Kamara picked up steam after New Orleans jettisoned Adrian Peterson in favor of feeding touches to he and backfield counterpart Mark Ingram. The elusive running back finished the season with 728 rushing yards, 826 receiving yards and scored 14 total touchdowns, including a 106-yard kickoff return in Week 17 versus the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
He topped the league with 6.1 yards per carry, and the former Tennessee product was the first rookie since Gale Sayers (1965) to score five or more rushing and receiving touchdowns as well as a return touchdown in a single season.
The Saints selected Lattimore with the No. 11 pick out of Ohio State as they looked to revamp a secondary that was the NFL’s worst at the defending the pass in 2016. All the first-year cover man did was became the fifth-highest rated cornerback in the league according to PFF en route to posting a team high 18 pass deflections and five interceptions. Defensive coordinator Dennis Allen routinely put the youngster on an island with some of the best receivers in the game and Lattimore routinely delivered, shutting down some big-name guys including Brandin Cooks, Mike Evans and Davante Adams.
New Orleans finally broke out of their perennial 7-9 slump thanks to the performances of not only Lattimore and Kamara, but No. 32 pick Ryan Ramczyk and second-rounder Marcus Williams. The Saints finished 11-5 with a division crown and it’s first post season berth since 2013 thanks to the strength of their rookie class, and it appears they will continue to be contenders as these young players further develop their NFL game.
Like this article?
Sign up for the Saints Wire email newsletter to get our top stories in your inbox every morning
Success
 Thanks for signing up.
 You'll be waking up a little more awesome tomorrow. 
Whoa!
 Something went wrong.
