Annette Bening, Greta Gerwig revel in roles of the 'Century'
Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this report misstated writer/director Mike Mills' age.
NEW YORK — When Greta Gerwig was a kid, her mom always insisted that she pack her lunch and lay out her clothes the night before school.
"I always thought, 'When I grow up, I won't be like that,' " says Gerwig, 33, sitting with her 20th Century Women co-star Annette Bening. Now "I have friends who have kids and when I've stayed with them, I'd start to be like, 'You need to lay out their clothes the night before, we're not going to make all these decisions in the morning.' And I thought, 'Oh, I've become my mother.' "
A parent's love, lessons and little quirks are at the heart of 20th Century Women (in theaters Dec. 28 in New York and Los Angeles; expands nationwide Jan. 20), which is nominated for two Golden Globe awards including best comedy or musical and actress (Bening). The feel-good drama boasts "a note-perfect ensemble anchored by a never-better" Bening, writes The Hollywood Reporter's David Rooney, with pundits on GoldDerby.com predicting Oscar nods for both her and Gerwig.

In the film, Bening plays eccentric single mother Dorothea, who is struggling to raise her 15-year-old son, Jamie (Lucas Jade Zumann), in '70s-era Santa Barbara, Calif. Feeling increasingly out of step with Jamie and the ever-changing world, Dorothea calls on her tenant, a punk photographer named Abbie (Gerwig), and Jamie's boyhood crush, Julie (Elle Fanning), to help "raise" him to become a man, whether that means teaching him about feminism or how to smoke a cigarette.

"What I appreciate about this story is that there are three very different women," says Bening, 58, who was drawn to Dorothea's "enigmatic" persona and applauds writer/director Mike Mills for his textured female roles. "You don't see a lot of complex stories about teenage girls, but the way that he's written Elle's character, there's this dark side. And then Abbie: She's a punk, but she's also" recovering from cervical cancer. "There's all these contradictions that he puts together."
20th Century is Mills' first movie since 2010's Beginners, which was inspired by his real-life father, who came out as gay at age 75. His latest is a similarly autobiographical tribute to his mother, a child of the Great Depression who looked like Amelia Earhart, aspired to be a pilot and worked as a draftsperson. She died of brain cancer in 1999.

Writing Dorothea, whose life almost directly parallels his mom's, "I needed a natural, (middle-aged) woman who had some androgyny and an emotional intelligence," says Mills, 50. "I purposely wrote (her) to be contradictory and not just going to show you all her parts right away, which was what my mom was like. Meeting Annette, I was like, 'Oof, you're so that person.' "
Before shooting started, Mills equipped his cast with "research" materials to help them get to know their characters. He gave Gerwig art and photography books, and arranged informal interviews for the actress with his older sister, who inspired Abbie. "He's really great at providing a library for your character that you can go back to," Gerwig says. "For Mike, objects and artifacts are emotional."

Bening looked through Mills' family photos and watched some of his mom's favorite Humphrey Bogart movies. She also tapped into her own experiences raising four children with husband Warren Beatty and growing up in 1970s San Diego, as a self-confessed "theater nerd" with an unruly streak.
"I had a wild side," Bening says, smirking. "But I haven't told my children enough about that yet, so I'm not going to tell you."
CLOSE

 A coming of age story, staring Annette Bening, of women living in the late 1970's in Southern California. USA TODAY NETWORK
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2hsTQIw
