Funding for women-founded startups is stalling. Here are some reasons why.
Corrections & Clarifications: A previous version of this story didn't clearly state that Nicholas Langeveld is the former chairman of Affectiva. 
 Jeannine Shao Collins took her 16-year-old daughter’s idea for a way to champion young women entrepreneurs and ran with it in 2014.
Girl Starter is a reality television show that centers on 18- to 24-year-old entrepreneurs who compete for $100,000 and guidance from a network of mentors. Fresh off its first season on Discovery TLC, the show toured several cities casting for its second season in May and June.
Collins got there without funding from venture capital firms. Instead, sponsors, including Staples and Microsoft, saw a market where venture capital firms didn’t.
Collins' experience isn't unlike that of a lot of women looking for funding to get a new business off the ground. Just 4% of funding from U.S.-based VC firms through July 13 of this year went to women-founded start-ups in their earliest stages, known as angel or seed funding, figures from PitchBook, a private capital data and research firm, show. Early-stage VC funding, the next level up, shows a similar pattern at 3% so far this year. Both sets of figures are unchanged from 2016. 
And when it comes to late-stage fundraising, female-founded firms got just 1% of capital, also stagnant compared to 2016.
Some of the barriers included old-fashioned stereotypes. In some fundraising meetings, finance-related questions were directed at her husband and co-founder Chris Collins, a marketing executive, rather than Jeannine or female co-founder, television writer Dani Davis.
Once, the team was asked why Girl Starter was targeting "such a niche market,” Collins says. ``I said niche? It’s 50% of the population. We’ve had some crazy conversations.”
But the bias that leaves some women-led businesses unfunded may come from a different place. Preliminary results from one study led by Babson College professor Lakshmi Balachandra looked at how much the masculinity or the femininity of the target market matters in funding decisions.

For instance, if a company’s product was a diagnostic tool was aimed at prostate cancer, the CEO would be a man and for cervical cancer, a woman. Male VCs saw firms with products aimed towards men as more likely to get funding, while female-led VCs said the same for products aimed at women.
``It was shocking. Investors go straight along gender lines,” Balachandra says. Men ``want to see a male market run by a man. And women prefer women’s markets run by women.”
When women do get funding, it’s often less, says Loretta McCarthy, managing partner of Golden Seeds says pointing to the lack of women in decision-making roles at VC firms making larger investments. Golden Seeds invests in early-stage companies led by women.
Related: 
``Borrowing money is about relationships. It’s the people you know and the people they know,” says Sheri Orlowitz, founding partner at Artemis Holdings Group, a VC firm. ``I don’t care how excellent you are, it’s really about relationships.”
An analysis from TechCrunch last year concluded 7% of partners in the top 100 VC firms were women.
Rana el Kaliouby, CEO and co-founder of artificial Intelligence firm Affectiva, says the networks she formed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s media lab, where the company was created were invaluable when seeking VC funds.

Affectiva, whose technology is designed to recognize human emotion, has about 50 employees, with about 30 in Boston and the rest in Cairo. Its VC investors include Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Beyers and Horizons Ventures, both have high-profile women executives.
Still, having a male chairman has helped. At a recent event with potential investors, el Kaliouby says she was struck by how the mood became informal one because Affectiva’s former chairman, Nicholas Langeveld, knew some of the men in the room socially.
While ``100 percent sure” she would have landed that meeting by herself, she described the shift as both fascinating and palpable.
``Until we have enough women investors, where I can sit down at a table and we have something to talk about in the same way these guys have something to talk about,” el Kaliouby says, “it will be harder.”
CONNECTTWEET 108 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2wdindt
