Entrepreneurs: Investing in your business doesn't cost, in fact, it pays
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story didn’t include one of the parties that contributed to the renovation of the Outback Steakhouse. 
As the Great Recession was coming to a close, Jason Bender and his partners decided that the time was right to bet on their business.
 As so they did. In fact, they bet big.
The franchisees of an Outback Steakhouse restaurant, Bender and his partners, and his landlord, went all-in on an expensive and dramatic remodel that included a contemporary new interior design, a new roof, new grills, a new point-of-sale system, structural changes, energy efficiency upgrades – the whole shebang.
The result: “Not only did we have record sales last year,” Bender says, “but since the recession we have added about 15 employees, bringing our total to around 60, and our customer service surveys are at an all-time high.”
The fact is, investing in your business doesn’t cost, it pays.
Next week, as part of National Small Business Week, the Small Business Administration will honor the Small Business Person of the Year winners from all 50 states. These folks have all created different sorts of businesses and they all have differing skill sets, yet you can bet one thing they have in common is that they have been more than willing to invest in their own business to make them more successful.
Since 1963, the first week of May has been set aside to promote and honor America’s entrepreneurs and the small businesses that they have created. This year, Small Business Week includes national events are planned in Atlanta, Denver, New York City, Phoenix, Washington, D.C. and San Jose and Oakland, Calif.
Why all the fuss? Small businesses are an important engine of the U.S. economy. According to the Census Bureau, 99% of all business in the U.S. are small businesses, and roughly half of all employees work for those businesses. Additionally, small business generates about 2/3 of new jobs, according to the SBA.
“If our small business sector was a country, its output would rank number three above Germany and Japan,” says SBA Administrator Maria Contreras-Sweet.

For many small business owners, investing in their businesses -- particularly following uncertain economic times -- can be counter-intuitive. Nervous about taking risks during of after a period of economic uncertainty, these entrepreneurs tend to hold back, preferring to wait and see. The hesitancy to invest money, especially, is understandable. For starters, according to the Kaufman Foundation Index, the nature of the recovery from the last recession has been different than other economically challenging periods. While startup activity is on the rise, growth has been slow. As a result, many entrepreneurs are reluctant to invest in their business. Additionally, the two main pain points for small business are time and money. Given that investing in one’s business requires both, it's not hard to understand why a small business owner might hold back on a big outlay of cash.
Some owners find that consistent spending, rather than large outlays of cash works for their businesses.
While Bender and his Outback Steakhouse franchise partners made a huge investment at one time, some entrepreneurs, such as Dan Pred find that they are constantly making smaller investments to stay competitive. Pred is the owner of Video Media in Portland, Oregon, a small video production company with national clients. “The nature of my work,” he says, “is that technology is always changing. While my clients probably don’t care if I have the latest and greatest equipment, I do. To do my best work means that I need to consistently invest in my business with things like new video cameras, still cameras, microphones, lighting, computers, hard drives, and even training. It’s expensive but it’s worth it.”
From May 2 through May 6, join USA TODAY as we explore the different ways that entrepreneurs and small business can invest in their success:
Monday: Small business owners are often over-worked and over-extended. We talk to entrepreneurs, including best-selling author and speaker Tony Robbins about strategies for investing in yourself.
Tuesday: Engaged, well-trained and happy employees are vital to a company of any size. Jennifer Hyman, CEO of fashion startup Rent The Runway, and others provide inspiration on investing in your workforce.
Wednesday: Spending money can be painful, but the result of not making investments in your business can be worse. We talk to owners including Alexa Hirschfeld, co-founder, and James Hirschfeld, CEO of online greeting card and invitation company Paperless Post about key investments they made in their business. Also, on Wednesday, bring your questions at 12 p.m. ET to the USA TODAY, Invest In Your Success Small Business Week Facebook chat featuring small business expert Tory Johnson.
Thursday: Getting the word out about what you do and how you do it better than the competition is a key driver of revenue for any business. Entrepreneurs including Miko Branch, CEO and co-founder of natural hair care products company Miss Jessie's will reveal how investing in marketing and promotions helped the company expand and grow.
Friday: Keeping your existing customers happy and finding new ones is the key to growth. hear from business owners, including Virgin Group founder Richard Branson, about how to attract customers and get them to return again and again.
Steve Strauss, @Steve Strauss on Twitter, is a lawyer specializing in small business and entrepreneurship and has been writing for USATODAY.com for 20 years. E-mail: sstrauss@mrallbiz.com. Website: TheSelfEmployed.

CONNECTTWEET 205 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/26Aid9J
