15 memorable moments from the 2017 college football season
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: USA TODAY Sports' George Schroeder and Paul Myerberg look to the national championship. USA TODAY Sports

From the first game in Australia all the way to the College Football Playoff semifinals in Pasadena and New Orleans, it was another amazing year for the sport.
Here are 15 of the most memorable moments that shaped the season, in chronological order
Francois hurt as Alabama beats Florida State 
One of the most anticipated opening-week match-ups in recent memory didn’t live up to its billing as Alabama methodically controlled Florida State from start to finish. The key moment came long after the contest was already decided when Seminoles quarterback Deondre Francois, still trying to make plays amid relentless pressure from the Crimson Tide defensive front, sustained a knee injury that would end his season before it really began.
Aftermath: Though FSU managed to continue its bowl streak with some creative rescheduling, its season was effectively over. Without Francois, the ‘Noles dropped their first conference game to North Carolina State, thus ending any aspirations they had about winning the ACC. As for Alabama, well, we’ll see how that story ends Monday night.
UCLA stages historic comeback
With 4:08 remaining in the third quarter of the season opener, Texas A&M led UCLA 44-10 and was seemingly on its way to a convincing win. Over the game’s final 19 minutes and without the aid of a turnover, UCLA quarterback Josh Rosen engineered five long touchdown drives totaling 396 yards to give the Bruins an improbable 45-44 win. It was the second biggest comeback in college football history, topped only by Michigan State’s 41-38 win against Northwestern in 2006 in which the Spartans trailed by 35.

Aftermath: The Aggies managed seven wins, but it wasn’t nearly enough to save Kevin Sumlin’s job. Unfortunately for the Bruins, this game would be the highlight in an otherwise forgettable 6-6 regular-season campaign in which coach Jim Mora was also shown the door.
Mayfield plants a flag
Oklahoma had waited a year for its rematch with Ohio State, and Baker Mayfield and the Sooners made the most of the opportunity, scoring 28 points in the second half to break open a tight game. As the team finished celebrating a decisive 31-16 victory in Columbus, the fiery Sooners QB left an Oklahoma flag on the iconic Buckeye logo at midfield in the Horseshoe.
Aftermath: Though Mayfield later issued an apology, the flag plant was just one indicator of his competitive drive that would serve him well as he led the Sooners to the playoff and claimed the Heisman Trophy. It would also wouldn't be the last of his lightning rod moments that made him the face of college football.
Baker Mayfield just did that. pic.twitter.com/Qo2Aw1pPE8
— ESPN (@espn) September 10, 2017
Georgia emerges with win at Notre Dame
With true freshman Jake Fromm about to make his first start, Georgia fans were a little nervous as the Bulldogs traveled to a rejuvenated Notre Dame for their toughest non-conference test. It was the defense, however, that came through to seal the 20-19 win as Lorenzo Carter recovered a fumble in the final two minutes.
Aftermath: Fighting Irish coach Brian Kelly got a little salty after the game, insisting yet another close loss wouldn’t snowball in the manner of last year. Turns out he was right, and Notre Dame would go on to a more Notre Dame-like 10-win campaign that ended with a Citrus Bowl victory against LSU. As for the Bulldogs, the fun was just getting started.
Florida lives on a prayer
With the season still young, proud fans of Florida and Tennessee could still harbor hopes of competing in the SEC East. As their sloppily-played league opener seemed headed for overtime, the Gators had one last shot. Feleipe Franks launched a 63-yard bomb that found Tyrie Cleveland in the end zone for a 26-20 victory that, for the moment at least, kept Florida’s hopes for a successful season alive.

Aftermath: The Gators won another contest in improbable fashion a week later against Kentucky en route to a 3-0 start in the SEC. It was all downhill from there, however, as the Gators dropped six of their last seven games and weren’t particularly competitive in any of the losses. A loss to Georgia in October led to the firing of Jim McElwain. The Vols’ misery was just beginning as they would go winless in the SEC for the first time since joining the league in 1933. With two games left, Butch Jones was let go, leaving both teams under new management in 2018.
Penn State beats the clock in Iowa
Opening Big Ten play at night in Iowa City was a tough assignment for Penn State. Despite a huge game from Saquon Barkley, things weren’t looking good for the Nittany Lions when Akrum Wadley’s 35-yard scamper gave the Hawkeyes a 19-15 lead with 1:42 to go. But Trace McSorley led a final drive, and he hooked up with Juwan Johnson for a seven-yard touchdown as time expired to allow Penn State to escape with the win.
Trace McSorley finds Juwan Johnson. #PennState at the buzzer! Heartbreak city for the #Hawkeyes in Iowa City.#PSU#PSUvsIOWA#CFBpic.twitter.com/slfVE6oM2U
— LMBF Sports (@LMBFSports) September 24, 2017
Aftermath: Outcomes like that tend to start team-of-destiny talk, and it looked as though Penn State might be just that until a few weeks later the table were turned. This would not be the last time the Hawkeyes would be heard from.
Southern California falls at Washington State
On a Friday night with a depleted offensive line, Sam Darnold endured a rough outing on the Palouse. It was a huge night for Luke Falk and the Cougars as they took down a top-five team for the first time since 1992. The Trojans had one final chance after the Cougars took a 30-27 lead with a field goal, but the drive never got started as Darnold was sacked and lost a fumble.
Aftermath: That win and the Cougars’ overtime comeback against Boise State were part of a 6-0 start for the Cougars. But the second half of the season wasn’t as kind, and the campaign ended with a thud as they were trounced in the Apple Cup showdown with Washington and by Michigan State in the Holiday Bowl. The Trojans went on to win the Pac-12, but a drubbing at Notre Dame effectively ended their playoff hopes.
Troy shocks LSU
After watching their Tigers get soundly thrashed by Mississippi State in September, LSU faithful were wondering how things could get worse. They were about to find out. Troy led most of the way, building a 24-7 advantage in the fourth quarter. The Tigers managed a couple late touchdowns, but the Trojans held on for the 24-21 victory. The school’s Twitter account thanked LSU for the Homecoming invitation.
Aftermath: The Tigers did manage a recovery, salvaging their season a couple of weeks later with a comeback win against Auburn. Troy went on to earn a share of the Sun Belt title and defeated North Texas in the New Orleans Bowl.
Cardiac ‘Canes
It’s one thing to get a clutch fourth-quarter score. It’s quite another to do it two weeks in a row. Darrell Langham was the man in the spotlight both times for Miami (Fla). Just seven days after catching a winning touchdown in the waning moments against Florida State, he snagged a tipped pass on fourth down that preserved a final drive and set up a field goal as the Hurricanes escaped against Georgia Tech 25-24.
Aftermath: Miami made it easier on itself with more decisive decisions against Virginia Tech and Notre Dame that got it to 10-0, But the Hurricaanes’ luck ran out as they finished on a three-game losing streak. The Miami loss was just one in a series of agonizing results for Georgia Tech, which wound up 5-6 with three setbacks decided by a single score.
Buckeyes rally past Penn State
It was a top-10 showdown with two powerhouse teams on a collision course, and it proved to be one of the most riveting games of the year. A week after demolishing Michigan, Penn State was seemingly in control at Ohio State. After building a big lead in the first half, the Nittany Lions were up 35-20 midway through the third quarter. It was then that J.T. Barrett found his Superman cape and led the Buckeyes all the way back for a 39-38 win, finishing the comeback with a 16-yard scoring pass to Marcus Baugh with 1:48 to play.

Aftermath: Having regained the inside track to the playoff, the Buckeyes squandered it a week later in one of the most puzzling performances of the entire season when they dropped a 55-24 decision to offensively-challenged Iowa. The Buckeyes won the Big Ten and beat Pac-12 champ USC convincingly in the Cotton Bowl. The Nittany Lions also came up short a week later to Michigan State, but they won out from there and finished with a Fiesta Bowl triumph against Washington.
Iowa State becomes Big 12 giant-killer
Not much was expected from the Cyclones in their second season under Matt Campbell. A first bowl game since 2012 would have been reason to celebrate. Instead, Iowa State stunned the conference's top teams, first by winning 38-31 at unbeaten Oklahoma for its first victory in Norman since 1990. Proving it wasn't a fluke, the Cyclones again notched a top-five victory by overcoming TCU at home 14-7 to put the team in Big 12 title contention.
Aftermath: Narrow losses to West Virginia and Oklahoma State ended hopes of a conference championship, but Iowa State rebounded with another defeat of a ranked opponent by topping No. 18 Memphis in the Liberty Bowl to finish 8-5. Along the way, Campbell signed an extension to stay in Ames, giving faithful a reason to believe more big wins will be on the horizon.
Iron Bowl stunner
For one week on the plains of Alabama, the Crimson Tide were mortal. With the SEC West crown on the line, Auburn was the better team on both sides of the ball in a 26-14 win. Kerryon Johnson gashed the Crimson Tide defense, and when Alabama absolutely needed points in the fourth quarter, mishandled snaps on consecutive plays killed the drive.
Aftermath: Having dispatched Georgia and Alabama on the same field, the Tigers weren’t as fortunate in the rematch with the Bulldogs in the SEC title game with Johnson not at 100%. Auburn had to settle for a Peach Bowl date with Central Florida. The Tide, meanwhile, got the benefit of the doubt from the playoff committee and might not be mortal after all.
Snowy Army-Navy classic
The academy rivals entered their annual season-ending showdown with winning records. Despite less than ideal playing conditions at Philadelphia’s Lincoln Financial Field, the two rivals staged an epic battle that came down to a couple of ill-timed mistakes. A one-yard plunge by Army QB Ahmad Bradshaw gave the Black Knights a 14-13 lead with just over five minutes to play. The Midshipmen drove into field-goal range, but two false starts added 10 yards to the attempt, and Bennett Moering’s 48-yard try drifted wide left as time expired.
Aftermath: Army went on to defeat San Diego State in a 42-35 thriller in the Armed Forces Bowl for complete its first 10-win season since its last Commander-in-Chief's Trophy in 1996. The Midshipmen overcame the disappointing result to finish on a high note, pounding Virginia 49-7 in the Military Bowl.
Central Florida runs the table
Only one team in the Football Bowl Subdivision will finish the season without a loss. Central Florida’s last three contests showed just how difficult that is to accomplish, even for the best of the best. The Knights needed to get past in-state foe South Florida just to win its division and play for the American Athletic Conference title. They did so in thrilling fashion, outlasting the Bulls 49-42 to set up a rematch with Memphis. The AAC final was another track meet, with the Knights prevailing 62-55 in double overtime. Their 12-0 regular season didn’t get them into the playoff, but they took advantage of their major bowl opportunity by producing a 34-27 Peach Bowl triumph against Auburn. Yes, that’s the same Auburn that owns a win against the two title game participants.
Aftermath: You can’t really blame school officials for doing the most with the moment. Coach Scott Frost is now off to his alma mater Nebraska, but UCF declared itself national champion and backed it up by distributing championship bonuses to its coaching staff.
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: USA TODAY Sports' Dan Wolken and Nancy Armour debate whether or not the College Football Playoff system needs to be changed. USA TODAY Sports
Rose Bowl for the ages
This one is still fresh in your memory, we suspect. But in case you need any reminders, it began with Mayfield, the runaway Heisman Trophy winner, dissecting the SEC champion defense for 31 first-half points, featured plenty of huge runs by those vaunted Georgia backs, featured a couple of unlikely defensive stands in overtime, and ended with Sony Michel’s fourth touchdown of the day in the second extra session. When the dust settled, it was the first overtime Rose Bowl in the Granddaddy’s history, a 54-48 all-time classic that won’t soon be forgotten.
Aftermath: As Oklahoma fans ponder the ‘what ifs’ of just one more play, the Bulldogs are set to take on Alabama in the first all-SEC national championship game of the short playoff era. No, UCF doesn’t get to play the winner.
IMAGES FROM THE COLLEGE FOOTBALL BOWL SEASON

 Alabama defensive lineman Da'Ron Payne, left, and quarterback Jalen Hurts hold the 2018 Sugar Bowl trophy after beating Clemson in the College Football Playoff semifinal. Chuck Cook, USA TODAY Sports
