Sears, Kmart offer convenience and value
We remain committed to returning Sears Holdings to profitability: Opposing view

CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDIN 9 COMMENTEMAILMORE
For more than a century, Sears and Kmart have changed to meet the needs of shoppers across America. Consistent with that unbroken evolution, our focus over the past several years has been on transforming our company into an integrated retailer that seamlessly connects the digital and physical shopping experiences.
We launched our Shop Your Way membership platform in 2009 to gain a deeper knowledge of our customers and better serve their needs, both online and in our stores. Today, we have tens of millions of Shop Your Way members actively engaging with us through our digital platforms and our more than 1,000 physical locations.
Our members have access to unmatched levels of convenience that allow them to shop with us wherever, whenever and however they want. For example, our free In-Vehicle Pickup service allows members to buy online at Sears.com and, using the Sears app, have their items directly loaded into their car at any Sears store — guaranteed within five minutes of arrival, without ever leaving their vehicle.
Similarly, through our advanced Shop Your Way analytics, we personalize promotions and rewards for our members, increasing the value we can offer on the products they want, need and love.
In fact, this holiday season we’ve given our members both convenience and value by offering early access to all Black Friday deals across our stores and online channels.
So while the retail environment remains as competitive as ever, we continue to make progress toward our transformation — as demonstrated by the additional 10 million members who joined our Shop Your Way program in the past 12 months.
Sears and Kmart are two of America’s most iconic retailers and remain committed to returning the company to profitability. We are deeply proud of our tens of thousands of associates nationwide who are working hard to serve our members this holiday season and will for many more holiday seasons to come.
Chris Brathwaite is vice president of corporate communications for Sears Holdings.
If you can't see this reader poll, please refresh your page.
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDIN 9 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2hYvfhZ
