Life Time Fitness cable news ban: Are opposing views bad for your mental health?
Tuning out the issues doesn’t make them go away. All Americans, gym-goers included, should be strong enough to listen to and respect other viewpoints.

CONNECTTWEET 44 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Americans are out of shape. Not just because many of us can’t do more than 10 pushups or run a mile in under 12 minutes, but because we’ve given up on trying to hear ideas and opinions with which we disagree. Our minds are as flabby as our bodies. 
Life Time Fitness announced this month it is banning cable news stations, including CNN, Fox News, MSNBC and CNBC, on the large television screens placed around its facilities. The company said it is responding to numerous member complaints about news stations and wants to create a healthy, “family oriented” environment for its customers. 
So instead of playing the national news and political debates, Life Time Fitness televisions will now play family-friendly mainstays like Law and Order SVU acting out sexual assault and murder, reality television showing cops arresting drunk drivers in their underpants, and music videos that objectify women. 
As a private company, Life Time Fitness can set whatever rules it wants to on its property. But the company’s message — that political debate detracts from Americans’ emotional and psychological health — demonstrates a worrisome trend across the United States: Americans simply do not have the strength to calmly and respectfully hear viewpoints with which they disagree.
Take college campuses. More than two years ago Greg Lukianoff and Jonathan Haidt warned that colleges’ attempts to create campus-wide “safe spaces” and shield students from words and ideas they found objectionable were detrimental to mental health. The unwillingness of students to hear ideas they dislike led to violent protests at Berkeley and Middlebury College, and nearly one in five college students nationwide now says it's acceptable to use violence to silence a speaker they oppose.
Adults are hardly immune. Although 71% of Americans blamed “political correctness” for keeping important debates from occurring, majorities of people in both political parties are happy to punish people for speech with which they disagree.
POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media
Yes, the current news can be divisive, but that isn’t a reason to turn off the television. Life Time Fitness is reacting to what it believes is a breakdown in productive debate around tough issues in our society. But banning national news from these gyms while leaving tawdry reality TV only disengages the public further from some of the toughest challenges our country has faced in a long time. These challenges require strong, active leadership. Tuning out the issues doesn’t make them go away. 
Just as greater physical fitness allows us to run further, lift more, and enjoy greater health, we build mental resilience and discipline by engaging a broad range of people in meaningful, interesting, and sometimes wholly unexpected conversations. After all, if we can’t understand our opposition’s perspective we won’t be able to craft an alternative solution or even get back to a place where our citizens can respectfully disagree with one another.
Here’s hoping that the fitness chain’s ban on cable news will end as quickly as most New Year’s resolutions do.
Sarah Ruger directs the Charles Koch Institute’s free expression initiatives. Follow her on Twitter: @SarahRuger. 
 To respond to a column, submit a comment to letters@usatoday.com.
CONNECTTWEET 44 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2FHkGXx
