Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport Guide
Contact information and flight status
broward.org/airport; 954-359-6100 (24 hours).
Checkpoint savvy
Busiest times: 6 a.m.- 7:30 a.m; 10:30 a.m. 1 p.m.; and 5 p.m. 8 p.m. (especially Terminal 4 during the winter season).
Workarounds: Cruise passengers can skip long baggage check lines by using the remote baggage check-in services offered in cooperation with cruise lines.
Depending on your airline and your status with TSA, expedited TSA PreCheck lanes may be available.
Parking
Most convenient: Curbside valet, $25/day. Daily parking: Palm, Hibiscus and Cypress Garage (Floors 7,8,9; adjacent to Terminal 1): $15/day. Hourly parking: $3/hour (maximum $36/day), Palm and Hibiscus garages only. First 20 minutes free.
Overflow lot: $10/day.
Cell phone waiting lot: located at 600 Terminal Drive. Flight arrival screens available.
Transportation to/from city
Most convenient: A taxi to downtown (Las Olas area), $18. Travel time: about 15 minutes. Taxi rides to the cruise terminal (Port Everglades) are about $12. See more options.
Least expensive: BCT (Broward Public Transit) route No. 1 to downtown, $1.50. Travel time: About 30-45 minutes. See more options.
Wi-Fi and charging stations
Free wireless Internet access is available throughout the airport and the rental car center.
Power outlets/charging stations: Free power-charging stations in Terminals 1 and 4. Paid power-charging stations in Terminals 1, 2 and 3. FLL is actively adding more free power kiosks.
Go local
Good choice for local gifts: Discover Fort Lauderdale has gourmet foods, souvenirs and memorabilia from area museums and attractions (Terminal 1, post-security). Souvenirs also at Hudson News (Terminal 1), A1A Travel Mart (Terminals 3 and 4) and other gift shops. See more options.
Good choice for local food: Terminal 1: Shula Burger. Terminal 2: Tropical Treats & Chocolates. Terminal 3: Food Network Kitchen (Concourse F). Terminal 4: Casavana Cuban Restaurant and Café, Casa Noble (tequila bar), Harvest & Grounds. Rental car center: Cuban Corner. See more options.
Tips and tidbits
FLL has business service centers, public baggage storage, and an art collection displayed in the terminals and the rental car center that includes Duane Hanson's lifelike Vendor with Walkman and more than 40 other pieces. Changing exhibits are displayed in the Lee Wagener Art Gallery in Terminal 2. FLL has six “Baby Oasis” nursing stations; locations listed here.
Nearby layover option
Next to the airport, on the north side of Griffin Road (but not accessible on foot) is Greenbelt Public Park which has walking paths and ponds. Ocean beaches are about 10 minutes from the airport, and the Oakwood Plaza shopping mall, with restaurants and movie theaters, is four miles away.
Your tips and picks?
Please share your time and money-saving tips, favorite restaurants, bars and stores in comments below.
These guides are written by Harriet Baskas, who is the author of six books, including the airport guidebook Stuck at the Airport and a blog of the same name.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/QIHNW2
