Five cool VIP experiences for the sports fan on your list
As the holidays approach, maybe the gift you'd like to give the sports fan in your life can't be wrapped in a box or topped with a bow. Maybe it's an experience, like attending a game or meeting a favorite player. 
Or, if money is no object, maybe it's something even more extravagant.
USA Today Sports assembled a list of VIP experiences that go beyond the run-of-the-mill ticket or meet and greet. 
Here are five of the coolest, most interesting sports experiences money can buy.

Tennis legends Steffi Graf and Andre Agassi 
 Tennis clinic with legends 
 Price: $56,500 per person (party of two) 
With 30 Grand Slam singles titles between them, Andre Agassi and Steffi Graf are two of tennis's most accomplished stars and arguably the sport's most prolific couple. And as part of an experience advertised on IfOnly.com, you and one other person can participate in a private tennis clinic with Graf and Agassi, the centerpiece of a weekend trip to Las Vegas. The experience also includes lunch, dinner and a stay at the Bellagio, and benefits Children for Tomorrow. Caveat: Graf and Agassi may not be around for the grub.
 Be a Yankee for a week 
 Price: $2,200 - $5,100 
The New York Yankees are one of several Major League Baseball teams that host fantasy camps, giving participants the opportunity to don their official uniform, meet current and/or former players and coaches, and take the field. The Yankees have several options, including a men's camp ($5,100 per person for a week), women's mini-camp ($2,200 per person for four days) and father-son clinic ($2,950 per pair for four days). Several other teams, including the Atlanta Braves and Cincinnati Reds offer a variety of similar experiences.
 A peek into Ronaldo’s world  
 Price: $25,000 per person (minimum party of two) 
Cristiano Ronaldo is one of the most famous athletes in the world, a five-time recipient of the Ballon d'Or whom Forbes magazine rated as the world's highest-paid athlete in 2017. And according to an experience advertised on IfOnly.com, you and at least one other person can get a glimpse into his daily routine. Watch a Real Madrid game from Ronaldo’s personal box suite, meet the world soccer star, attend a team practice and tour Santiago Bernabeu Stadium — all for a cool $25,000 apiece. This experience stretches multiple days and benefits the Forever Dream Foundation.
 Race like the king 
 Price: Up to $3,999.99 per person 
 The Richard Petty Driving Experience offers a variety of NASCAR experiences, from riding along in a car for three laps ($149.99) to the "advanced experience" — four driving sessions of 10 laps each with you (or a gift recipient) behind the wheel. This experience is offered at Daytona International Speedway or Talladega Superspeedway for about $4,000, or at Charlotte Motor Speedway for $400 less. The package includes one-on-one feedback from an instructor on pit road and an on-track driving instructor. 
 A day of dirt bikes 
 Price: $10,000 per person (party of three) 
If motocross is your passion, look no further. As part of an experience advertised on IfOnly.com, a group of three people can spend a day with Jeremy McGrath at his private ranch, racing dirt bikes and ATVs with the seven-time Supercross champion. The experience also includes lunch, three autographed jerseys from McGrath and the possibility of participating in other activities with the California native, including fishing, shooting or golfing. Part of the payment benefits Be The Match.
