Readers sound off: Trump finally spoke out against disrespect
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 17 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Letter to the editor:
Thanks, President Trump, for calling out NFL players who disrespect our flag. The owners don’t have the spine to do it. Fans at the game don’t buy tickets to watch players protest. Let the players protest in the locker room before the game.
Richard Saale; Kansas City, Mo.
Letter to the editor:
It is Trump who should be fired as president.
Trump defies and disrespects the American people and the Constitution at every opportunity he gets. He disrespects the news media, veterans, war heroes, other ethnicities, our judicial system, leaders of other countries, our participation in NATO, global warming and women who don’t live up to his standards.
No players (or individuals, for that matter) should be mocked or fired for peacefully displaying their opinions and taking a stand for what they believe is right.
This is America. And this is a democratic country. Our president should be setting the example on behavior. But, sadly, he doesn’t.
Barbara Barysh; Englewood, N.J.

I support 100% the right to peacefully protest the racism demonstrated by President Trump and his administration.
— Sandy Windelspecht
If these athletes really care, then where is their stand for what is going on in our inner cities? Raise your fist and kneel in Chicago.
— George W. Kauffman
I stand to honor our country and those who fought for it. If you can sit during our national anthem, you have no skin in the game.
I can and have voiced my opinion against many things, but will always respect and honor the people and country that protect me!
— Gregg Hattley
Let us all not lose sight of the fact that this is typical Trump. He’s been doing this for a long time. Trump deflects from other issues, grabs attention for himself, and then sits back to laugh at all of us for being so easily distracted.
— Michael Carew
We asked our followers their thoughts on President Trump’s remarks on NFL players kneeling during the national anthem. Tweets are edited for clarity and grammar:
It eats away at Trump that he’ll never ever be looked up to as sports athletes are. Sad.
— @nvega1247
Trump is 100% right. These overpaid children need to grow up. Boycott the NFL and all its merchandise.
— @DonGarlinger
Trump has been more outspoken about football players silently protesting than about white supremacists violently protesting.
— @kvnlngstn
It is their constitutional right, that’s what makes America great. Get with the program, Trump, and read the Constitution! Shameful!
— @nana2jordyn1
It’s disgusting that sports and award shows have all turned political. It’s about time Trump spoke out. The NFL is losing fans.
— @NickGiammusso
To join the conversations about topics in USA TODAY, email letters@usatoday.com, comment on Facebook or use #tellusatoday on Twitter.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 17 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2yn4OoG
