5 things you need to know this weekend
Editor’s Note: This story was updated to remove an image of hooded participants in a Ku Klux Klan rally in South Carolina. Due to a technical problem when sharing on Twitter, the photo inadvertently paired with wording that didn’t match USA TODAY’s intended message for readers. A full explanation has been published here.
KKK to rally at S.C. statehouse
The Loyal White Knights will protest the removal of the confederate flag from South Carolina's statehouse grounds Saturday. "Our government is trying to erase white culture and our heritage right out of the pages of history books," an automated message on the group's answering machine said. Protesters can reserve the statehouse grounds online at a first-come, first-serve basis. The KKK-associated group will meet from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. ET.
CLOSE

 Tempers flared today during counter-protests over the Confederate flag at the South Carolina state house in Columbia just as the Ku Klux Klan was announcing plans for a pro-flag rally in the capitol city. USA TODAY
GOP, Democratic candidates descend on Iowa this weekend
Fifteen Republican and Democratic presidential contenders take over Iowa with at least 34 separate events this weekend. On Saturday, the Republicans will audition 10 presidential candidates during the GOP Family Leadership Summit in Ames, run by the Christian conservative activist group. Host Frank Luntz will ask questions of each individual candidate for 20-25 minutes. Democratic players met Friday at the Hall of Fame Celebration, and will attend events through Sunday. The buzz phrase of the Democratic weekend will be "income inequality," while spirituality will be at the heart of the GOP conference.
Jupiter, Venus and the moon cluster in Saturday's night sky
Skywatchers can catch a glimpse of Jupiter, Venus and the moon after sunset Saturday. The two planets and moon will appear in the west, with Venus nestling right next to the thin-crescent moon. But unlike how close they appeared in early July -- when at one point they appeared to be touching -- Jupiter will float about six degrees right of Venus.
