BI: New allegation surfaces on former Subway spokesman Jared Fogle
USA Today Network

Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this story misidentified who was involved in the text conversation with Jared Fogle.
Former Subway spokesman Jared Fogle allegedly claimed to have paid a 16-year-old girl $100 for sex, according to an affidavit Business Insider says the Federal Bureau of Investigation subpoenaed.
Court documents cite a series of text messages between Fogle and a former female Subway franchisee, Insider reports.
However, the FBI has not confirmed there is an open case, according to Wendy Osborne, special agent and spokeswoman for Indianapolis office for the FBI.
"The FBI has no new information to release regarding this matter," Osborne said. "The only thing we confirmed several weeks ago was that the FBI was conducting investigative activity in the Zionsville, Indiana, area."
Business Insider said in the article that it "independently verified the authenticity of the affidavit." "We also verified that a phone number in the document was registered to a Jared Fogle," the publication added.
Subway took to Facebook on August 1 writing, "About the most recent news story on Jared Fogle, this allegation, if true, is appalling and is contrary to the values of our brand. As previously stated, we have suspended our relationship with Jared."
In an emailed statement on Monday Subway added, "We have no record that this alleged complaint was ever brought to our attention. Had it been, we would have taken immediate action.”
In the alleged conversations, Fogle asked the franchisee to advertise herself on Craigslist for sex with other men, Insider reports.
She reportedly responds to one text saying, “Is this the same website you found that 16-year-old girl that you f***ed ... I still can’t believe you only paid $100 for her.’’
Fogle allegedly says, “It was amazing," according to Insider. 
Subway suspended its relationship with Fogle in July after FBI officials and Indiana State Police searched his home two months after an associate's arrest on child pornography charges.
Fogle has not been charged with any crime.
During the search, the FBI, police and U.S. Postal Service obtained documents, electronics and other items from Fogle's Zionsville, Indiana, home.
Fogle's rise as a sandwich spokesman turned him into a celebrity. He was a 425-pound freshman at Indiana University when he embarked on an unusual diet of turkey and veggie subs in 1998. After losing 235 pounds he began to appear in television commercials for Subway.
He has since starred in more than 300 Subway commercials, appeared in numerous television shows and movies, wrote an autobiographical book and pulls in $5,000 to $10,000 for personal appearances.
Contributing: The Indianapolis Star
CONNECTTWEET 2 LINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1N4hGkQ
