Kochs reorganize ground operations for post-election policy fights
1 Shares 





Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this post had the incorrect number of states in which Concerned Veterans operates.
WASHINGTON — The political network controlled by billionaires Charles and David Koch is reorganizing its sprawling grassroots operation as it readies itself for post-election battles over the direction of the conservative movement.
Three smaller groups in the network — Concerned Veterans for America, Generation Opportunity and LIBRE Initiative — now will become part of the Koch’s largest field group, Americans for Prosperity, network spokesman James Davis said Friday.
Davis said the move will help the smaller organizations “rapidly expand” into the 35 states where Americans for Prosperity now operates. The organizations each were established to spread the Koch’s free-market message to specific demographic groups. Generation Opportunity, for instance, courts Millennials, while LIBRE has sought to win over Hispanic voters by offering drivers’ license classes and tax preparation in crucial battleground states, such as Nevada and Florida.
LIBRE now operates in just 10 states, Concerned Veterans in 16, and Generation Opportunity in four.
The merger will happen after the November election with the goal of beefing up the network’s ground force for upcoming policy battles over reducing government spending and other issues.
“We’re going to be in a position to lead on policy,” Davis said.
The Kochs have invested heavily in building a permanent ground operation to deploy to help both candidates and conservative causes. In all, 1,200 people work for their grassroots organizations, up from 450 four years ago during the last presidential election.
Earlier this week, the network said it would not run any ads during the final month of the election and would instead use its expansive ground operations to help Republican candidates in eight U.S. Senate races.
The network has steered clear of aiding Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, whose support for some government entitlement programs and disdain for free-trade agreements diverge sharply from industrialist Charles Koch’s free-market, limited-government agenda.
The network’s move to reorganize also underscores the Kochs’ longstanding mission to shape the conservative movement from the ground up. Americans for Prosperity activists, for instance, have worked to beat back efforts to expand Medicaid in states such as Tennessee and to stop a 2014 tax levy to support the Columbus Zoo.

“We’ve always said this a long-term fight,” said Levi Russell, a spokesman for Americans with Prosperity. “The biggest impact we are going to have is on the state and local level, and we’ll let that drive what happens in Washington.”
An official with a Democratic super PAC said the change demonstrates that Koch arms such as LIBRE were little more than "front groups."
"These 'constituency groups' that the Kochs set up only serve one purpose, and that is to allow them to spend tens of millions of dollars to deceive Latinos, veterans, and young people to organize them against their own self-interests for the benefit of the billionaires' agenda," Eddie Vale, vice president of American Bridge, said in a statement.




Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2ct5wX1
