Review: PlayStation 4 Pro is all about 4K TV
Whether you should upgrade to Sony's high-powered model of the PlayStation 4 video game console depends on one device: your television.
Sony's PS4 Pro ($399.99), introduced this month, boasts more horsepower and the ability to host 4K resolutions in games as well as compatible video services like Netflix. But unless you own a 4K TV or plan to buy one soon, Sony's standard video game console will still serve you just fine.
For those who want to make the pricer move to 4K, setting up the PS4 Pro is no different than the standard PS4. Users plug in the included HDMI cable to their television, fire up the console and go through the setup process, including logging on or creating an account for PlayStation Network.
If you already own a PS4, users will be prompted to transfer everything from their current console to the Pro. An Ethernet cable is required to perform the transfer. Using a PS4 that gobbled up nearly all the 500 GB of storage available, it took me between 90 minutes to 2 hours to complete the transfer to the Pro.
The big draw of PS4 Pro is the jump into 4K gaming. Several games support the higher display resolutions, including Uncharted 4, Call of Duty: Infinite Warfare, NBA 2K17 and the company's roster of games for PlayStation VR, its virtual reality platform. Along with 4K, PS4 Pro supports High Dynamic Range (HDR), which boosts the color depth and contrast on games.
Without a 4K TV, Sony claims owners of standard high-definition sets will see improvements, including better visual quality and better or more consistent framerates.
Test: 4K TV makes the difference
To test this out, I played PS4 Pro on both a 4K TV and a non-4K set. Flipping between PS4 and PS4 Pro on the non-4K set, it was really tough to notice any significant differences. Once I got on the 4K set, the improvements really stand out. In a game like NBA 2K17, for example, colors from team uniforms pop on the screen, while crowds look more vibrant and detailed. Backgrounds in games like Call of Duty appear to show more detail compared to non-4K counterparts.
An important note on hooking up the PS4 Pro to a TV: it won't support HDR pass-through, which means you won't get HDR if, say, you have PlayStation VR hooked up. The HDMI cable must plug directly into the TV to work. Also, PS4 Pro doesn't support Ultra 4K Blu-ray discs, something to keep in mind if you hope to watch those on this console.
Outside 4K, PS4 Pro introduces some minor touches, including a larger overall size compared to the standard PS4, minor tweaks to the DualShock controller and the long-awaited debut of a 1 TB hard drive, essential for the player who prefers downloads over physical discs. If you need even more space, users can replace the hard drive.

Spending the extra $100 to jump to PS4 Pro depends on your preference for 4K. If you own a 4K TV, or plan on getting one very soon, then it's worth upgrading to PS4 Pro, especially with the larger 1 TB hard drive. But the standard PS4 is still a very good video game console. If you already own one, and aren't in the rush to buy a 4K display, you can wait to go Pro.
What happens if you haven't made the jump to PS4 or its rival, Microsoft's Xbox One? The Xbox One S offers a more tempting option, boasting not only HDR support but a 4K UHD Blu-ray player, larger hard drive, and costs $299. However, PS4 Pro will support native 4K games, while Xbox One S can upscale games to 4K.
Follow Brett Molina on Twitter: @brettmolina23.
CONNECTTWEET 4 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2g0p2hZ
