Escape city life at these nearby public lands
Two hours from Portland, the Deschutes Wild and Scenic River is central Oregon’s playground with ruggedly beautiful scenery for hiking and biking. Visitors can fish for steelhead and salmon or raft the exciting whitewater. It’s the perfect place for an adventure! Bob Wick, Bureau of Land Management
 Established in 1932, Cape Romain National Wildlife Refuge extends 22 miles along South Carolina’s Atlantic coast. This semi-tropical paradise includes a fascinating expanse of barrier islands, salt marshes, long sandy beaches, and maritime forest. An hour’s drive from Charleston, the refuge provides habitat for over 293 bird, 24 reptile and 12 amphibian species. Get in a boat or ferry, and see the beauty and wildlife at Cape Romain! William Sumrell, www.sharetheexperience.org
 There’s something else in Cleveland that rocks -- Cuyahoga Valley National Park in Ohio. It’s a quick drive from both Cleveland and Akron, so there’s no excuse not to visit. Take a hike, ride the scenic railroad or bike the towpath trail. Blue Hen Falls is a popular destination too. It’s an easy hike, so feel free to bring the family. Bob Trinnes, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area on the New Jersey-Pennsylvania border is a wonderland of forested mountains, tumbling waterfalls, Native American and Colonial historic sites, bountiful wildlife, and dynamic rivers and streams. Recreation opportunities include boating, biking, fishing, hunting, hiking and enjoying the views along scenic roadways. An easy drive from New York City and Philadelphia, the park is a popular year-round getaway. Here, it’s showing a spectrum of lovely fall colors. National Park Service
 Here’s a beautiful pic from the most visited national park in 2016: Golden Gate National Recreation Area. Located in San Francisco, Golden Gate is one of the largest urban parks in the world, offering visitors a chance to connect to nature, and learn more about the area’s rich culture and history. Eric Dabreo (www.sharetheexperience.org
 Just a few miles from Washington, D.C., Great Falls Park in Virginia provides stunning views of the Potomac River as it falls over a series of steep, jagged rocks and rushes through a narrow gorge. It’s a great place to get away from the hustle and bustle of the city. Michael Leung, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Strolling by the water at Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore in Indiana is a serene experience. The sun sparkles on the water and the breeze blows your troubles off your shoulders. Whether you enjoy scouting for rare species of birds or flying kites on the sandy beach, the national lakeshore's 15,000 acres will continually enchant you. Hikers will enjoy 50 miles of trails over rugged dunes, mysterious wetlands, sunny prairies, meandering rivers and peaceful forests. Even seeing the Chicago skyline 35 miles away across Lake Michigan makes it seem like the rest of the world is far away. National Park Service
 After a few days of visiting friends in the concrete jungle of New York City, you might need a breath of fresh air at nearby Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge in New York. Along the two main trails, you can see a wide variety of wildlife in the air, on the land and in the water. Ospreys and diamondback turtles are some of the most visible residents. Micael Fano, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Running along the Minnesota River, Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge is a natural escape from the nearby Twin Cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul. The refuge provides valuable habitat for a diversity of waterfowl and other migratory birds, fish and resident wildlife. Erik Fremstad, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Just south of Boise, Morley Nelson Snake River Birds of Prey National Conservation Area is bird-watching mecca that is close enough for an after work trip and boasts one of the highest concentration of raptors in the world. Bob Wick, Bureau of Land Management
 There's no better place to walk off your holiday treats than Mount Rainier National Park in Washington. A little more than an hour drive southwest of Seattle, it's easy to explore this natural wonderland. Miles of trails, stunning meadows and serene lakes encourage you to keep moving, looking for the next incredible view of the snow-capped peak of Mount Rainier. Be sure to check the weather conditions before heading out. Dale Blair (www.sharetheexperience.org
 Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge is like no other place on earth, where natural beauty and wilderness prevail. It preserves the Okefenokee Swamp in Georgia, providing vital habitats for birds, reptiles and other wildlife. Just a little over an hour away from Jacksonville, Florida, it is the perfect side trip to any Florida adventure. Graham McGeorge, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Not far from Boston, Massachusetts, is Parker River National Wildlife Refuge -- 4,700 acres of salt marsh, shrubland and sandy beach. Find some peace and quiet here while you enjoy watching over 300 species of resident and migratory birds. You’re be very thankful you visited. Sylvia Zarco, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Dive into adventure at Biscayne National Park in Florida. About an hour from Miami, the park stretches from a shoreline fringed with mangrove forest to the aquamarine waters of Biscayne Bay and the Atlantic Ocean. Boating and fishing are popular activities, but some of the best views of Biscayne are found under the water, exploring the third largest coral reef in the world. Shaun Wolfe, National Park Service
 No matter the season, Red Rock Canyon National Conservation Area offers spectacular outdoor recreation 17 miles west of Las Vegas, Nevada. Hikers, climbers, bikers and more are drawn to this stunning desert landscape, captured here with a beautiful afterglow from a sunset over Calico Hills. Bob Wick, Bureau of Land Management
 Located just northeast of Denver, the Rocky Mountain Arsenal National Wildlife Refuge is a 15,000-acre expanse of prairie, wetland and woodland habitat. The land has a unique story -- it has survived the test of time and transitioned from farmland to war-time manufacturing site to wildlife sanctuary today. It may be one of the finest conservation success stories in history and a place where wildlife (like the bison pictured here) thrives. Rich Keen, DPRA
 Whether you're in Phoenix or Tucson, Arizona, you won't regret taking a little time to visit Saguaro National Park. The nation's largest cacti, the giant saguaro is the universal symbol of the American west. These majestic plants are found only in a small portion of the United States. Here you have a chance to see these enormous cacti, silhouetted by the beauty of a magnificent desert sunset. It's a sight you won't forget. Michel Hersen, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Hidden in plain sight from Los Angeles, the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area offers easy access to surprisingly wild places. Experience the famous beaches of Malibu or explore more than 500 miles of trails. The park abounds with historical and cultural sites, from old movie ranches to Native American centers. What will you discover? Steve Lanctot, www.sharetheexperience.org
 About 30 minutes from Palm Springs, California, the Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument rises abruptly from the desert floor and reaches an elevation of 10,834 feet. Providing a picturesque backdrop to local communities, visitors can enjoy magnificent palm oases, snow-capped mountains, a national scenic trail and wilderness areas. Its extensive backcountry can be accessed via trails from both the Coachella Valley and the alpine village of Idyllwild. Bob Wick, Bureau of Land Management
 Established in 1901, Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge hosts a rare piece of the past -- a remnant mixed grass prairie, an island where the natural grasslands escaped destruction because the rocks underfoot defeated the plow. Located in southwestern Oklahoma less than two hours from Oklahoma City, the 59,020-acre refuge is home to two rugged ranges of granite mountains and fields of wildflowers. Kathy Suttles, www.sharetheexperience.org
 The Cadiz Dunes are some of the most remote landscape in California. Encompassing over 19,000 acres of the Cadiz Dune system, these public lands give you plenty of space to find the perfect spot to watch the stars. Bob Wick, Bureau of Land Management
 Canyonlands National Park offers stunning landscapes, along with deep geological and cultural history. This Utah park showcases the incredible effects of the long-term erosion of a landscape made of sedimentary rock. Camp at Island in the Sky to see some of these breathtaking views and a couple thousand stars throughout the night. Emily Ogden, National Park Service
 Come to Denali National Park from autumn to early spring to get breathtaking views of the aurora borealis. While the aurora occurs year-round, it is only visible in the park for about seven months when the night sky is dark enough. It’s a view you won’t want to miss. Kent Miller, National Park Service
 Almost 70 miles west of Florida’s Key West lies the remote Dry Tortugas National Park consisting of seven islands. Accessible only by boat or seaplane, this park’s views are worth the extra travel time. Dry Tortugas’s majestic Fort Jefferson, beautiful blue waters and surrounding coral reefs make it an amazing gem in the Gulf of Mexico. Jeff Berkes, www.sharetheexperience.com
 The Flaming Gorge Reservoir resides on the border between Utah and Wyoming and provides vital water storage and hydropower generation. The reservoir’s dam stands an impressive 502 feet tall but is hard to compare to the beauty and grace of Green River’s sharp cliffs. Meyer Lewin, www.sharetheexperience.com
 Glacier National Park is one of our finest parks for stargazing, so much so that it was named an International Dark Sky Park. If you’re lucky, you might even be able to catch the aurora borealis. Jacob W. Frank, National Park Service
 History stretches back over 10,000 years at Hovenweep National Monument to when nomadic Paleoindians passed through while hunting. The name “Hovenweep” is a Paiute/Ute word meaning “Deserted Valley,” which was adopted in 1874 by pioneer photographer William Henry Jackson. The structures at Hovenweep seen in the photo date back as far as 1200 A.D., allowing visitors to travel back to see what humans saw from these observatories hundreds of years ago. Jacob W. Frank, National Park Service
 Joshua Tree National Park is marked by two desert ecosystems coming together -- the Mojave and the Colorado. The conjoining of ecosystems gives this California park a wide diversity of wildlife and plants, including the famous Joshua Tree, which looks like it was happily plucked straight out of a Dr. Seuss book. Check out this fantastic park for a one-of-a-kind vegetation and great night skies. Brad Sutton, National Park Service
 Lassen National Park in California is marked by volcanic geology, including fumaroles (volcanic vents), boiling pools and steaming grounds galore. Attend an astronomy program to get a closer view of stars with binoculars or even witness the rings of Saturn through a telescope. Alison Taggart-Barone, National Park Service
 The Snake River winds through Morley Nelson Snake River Birds of Prey National Conservation Areas in Idaho. This land is home to the greatest concentration of nesting birds of prey in North America. Some 800 pairs of eagles, hawks and falcons come each spring to mate and raise their young. It’s an amazing sight to see young birds learn to fly and hunt along the Snake River. Bob Wick, Bureau of Land Management
 Mount Rainier National Park’s majestic peak towers over 14,000 feet tall and contains 25 named glaciers. During the summer months this Washington park turns into a rainbow of colors, filled with valleys overflowing with colorful wildflowers. Pictured here, the Milky Way erupts from the mountain. If you look closely, you can see the climbers getting an early start reaching to summit. Evan Eremita, www.sharetheexperience.com
 Natural Bridges National Monument in Utah contains three beautiful natural bridges named Kachina, Owachomo and Sipapu honoring the Native Americans who once made this area their home. Centuries ago, intermittent streams cut through sandstone to form these three bridges. Today, trails wind through the park’s deep canyons, cottonwood groves and pass all three bridges in one stunning hike. Manish Mamtani, www.sharetheexperience.com
 Part of Owyhee Canyonlands Wilderness, Pole Creek Wilderness in Idaho has stunning mountains, hoodoos, natural arches and river canyons galore. Those looking to escape hectic urban life will not be disappointed. Step back into history and experience the wild west at the the Owyhee Canyonlands. Bob Wick, Bureau of Land Management
 An icon of the great American west, the saguaro overwhelms the landscape of Arizona’s Saguaro National Park. The saguaro is one of America’s rarest plants --it only grows in the Sonoran Desert. No trip to Saguaro National Park is complete without catching a glimpse of these desert symbols. Aaron Rayburn, www.sharetheexperience.com
 Shenandoah National Park in Virginia lies just a mere 75 miles from the city lights of Washington, D.C. but it’s dark skies seem light years away. In this photo, the Milky Way shines over the Blue Ridge Mountains with the Perseid Meteor Shower visible. Zack Danik, www.sharetheexperience.com
 Sherburne National Wildlife Refuge contains a mix of Minnesota’s tallgrass prairie, wetlands and “Big Woods.” This wildlife refuge is an important habitat for bird species, including Sandhill Cranes and red-headed woodpeckers. The aurora borealis isn’t often seen in Minnesota, but when conditions are just right, it can make for a beautiful experience. Bryan Worth, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
 A hiker captured this photo of the Milky Way on the trail to the highest peak in Great Smoky Mountains National Park, Clingmans Dome. This peak in Tennessee hugs the border of North Carolina, stretching 6,643 feet up to offer 360 degree views of the Smokies. Tom Blankenship, www.sharetheexperience.com
 Closely associated with Alaskan nights, the Northern Lights snake through the skies above White Mountains National Recreation Area. Aside from camping, this area’s more than 240 miles of maintained winter trails offers great winter recreation opportunities -- from cross-country skiing and snowshoeing to dog sledding and snowmobiling. No matter your activity, you can find breathtaking views, and on a clear night, northern lights illuminating the skies. Bob Wick, Bureau of Land Management
 Old Faithful’s multiple daily eruptions draw massive crowds at Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming. The huge spurts of water can expel between 3,700-8,400 gallons in the span of a few minutes with water temperatures reaching over 200 degrees Fahrenheit. This natural phenomenon makes for a great show, especially with Yellowstone’s beautiful night sky as the backdrop. Neal Herbert, National Park Service
 The Milky Way dominates the sky above Zion National Park’s towering sandstone cliffs. These colorful 2,000-foot cliffs were sculpted over 250 million years ago from sand dunes of a desert. Today, this Utah park’s diverse topography and ecosystems allow more than 1,000 species of plants, 207 species of bird and 67 species of mammals to flourish here. David Mills, www.sharetheexperience.com
