Watch live: U.N. Security Council meets on suspected Syria chemical attack
The United Nations Security Council is expected to meet in an emergency session Wednesday about the suspected deadly chemical attack that killed scores of civilians, including children, in Syria. Watch the open meeting live in the player above.
Human rights reports said the gas appeared to be a virulent deadly strain and covered a wider area than past chemical attacks, which if confirmed, would be the largest in Syria since August 2013. The Syrian government of President Bashar Assad denied using chemical weapons, but the U.S. and international communities were unconvinced. Russia’s defense ministry said Wednesday that a Syrian airstrike on "terrorist" workshops producing chemical weapons was responsible for the deaths.

x
Embed
THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Haunting images from the Syrian conflict | 1:07
Powerful images out of Syria reveal the sad impact violence has had on the nation. Some of the images in the video may be disturbing. Wochit
1 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR What is happening in the Syrian Civil War | 2:15
Foreign affairs reporter Oren Dorell explains who is fighting whom in the Syrian Civil War in two minutes. USA TODAY
2 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Tillerson: 'No doubt' Assad behind Syria attack | 1:03
Mexico's top diplomat met with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson Wednesday to discuss bilateral relations. During a photo op, Tillerson said there's "no doubt in our mind" that the Syrian government under was behind a recent chemical attack. (April 5) AP
3 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Trump toughens talk on Syria after chemical attack | 1:23
After a major chemical weapons attack in Syria, President Trump told reporters, "My attitude toward Syria and Assad has changed very much." Video provided by Newsy Newslook
4 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Haley: Russia needs to 'do their job' in Syria | 2:23
U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley discussed a wide range of topics from Russia and Syria to imploring people to have compassion on citizens of other countries during a "Women in the World" Summit in New York Wednesday night. (April 5) AP
5 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Trump: Syria attack 'crossed many lines' | 2:20
U.S. President Donald Trump says a suspected chemical attack by the Syrian government against civilians "crossed a lot of lines." (April 5) AP
6 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR U.N. resolution seeks Syrian information on attack | 1:57
A proposed UN Security Council resolution would condemn the use of chemical weapons in Syria and stress the government’s obligation to provide information about air operations after a suspected chemical attack killed dozens of people. (April 5) AP
7 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Children reportedly killed along with dozens in Syrian gas attack | 1:06
At least 58 people were Killed in a suspected Chemical Attack in a rebel-held area in Syria. Buzz60
8 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR WH: Syria attack a result of Obama's 'weakness' | 0:40
The White House has condemned what it calls as a "heinous" chemical attack against civilians by Syria's government. But spokesman Sean Spicer said it was a result of the Obama administration's "weakness" in addressing the Syrian civil war. (April 4) AP
9 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Save the children sounds the alarm on Syrian child deaths | 1:11
The NGO Save the Children sets up a mock cemetery in Brussels to represent Syrian children killed in the country's six-year conflict, ahead of a scheduled EU conference on the post-conflict future of the war-torn nation. Video provided by AFP Newslook
10 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Raw: Death toll rises in Syria chemical attack | 1:42
A suspected chemical attack in a town in Syria's northern Idlib province killed dozens of people on Tuesday, Syrian opposition activists said, describing the attack as among the worst in the country's six-year civil war. (April 4) AP
11 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR At least 21 dead after an airstrike on Syria's Idlib | 0:35
At least nine people were killed, among them four children, after an air strike hit a building in the Syrian town of Idlib, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said Wednesday, on the day marking the sixth anniversary of the beginning of the conflict in Syria. Video provided by AFP Newslook
12 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Syrian regime accused of slaughtering civilians as Aleppo nears fall | 1:06
The U.N. Office for the High Commissioner for Human Rights said in a statement on Tuesday that at least 82 civilians had reportedly been killed by forces supporting the regime of President Bashar Assad in Aleppo Time
13 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Twin blasts kill 40 in Syria's capital | 0:36
Twin explosions on Saturday near religious shrines frequented by Shiite pilgrims in Damascus, Syria killed at least 40 people, Arab media reported. (March 11) AP
14 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR North Syria exodus continues as families flee assault on IS | 1:09
More displaced Syrians are fleeing fighting in northern Syria, particularly the town of Khafsah which Russian-back government forces are trying to retake from the Islamic State group, with many seeking refuge in areas around Manbij, a town controlled by the US-backed Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). Video provided by AFP Newslook
15 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Syrians trapped in Aleppo plead for help on social media | 0:49
As government forces reclaim the last portions of Aleppo held by rebel forces, Syrian civilians describe what may be their final moments in social media posts and telephone calls. USA TODAY
16 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Syrian army evacuates residents of recaptured Aleppo old city | 1:27
Syria's army took control of all of Aleppo's Old City as rebels retreated in the face of an offensive that has seen troops make significant gains in opposition territory. Video provided by AFP Newslook
17 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR ISIS Has Recaptured Palmyra, Syrian Activists Say | 0:43
ISIS militants seized the ancient Syrian town of Palmyra on Sunday from government troops despite a wave of Russian airstrikes, a major advance after a year of setbacks in Syria and neighboring Iraq. Time
18 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Raw: Aid convoy hit by airstrike near Aleppo | 0:57
Syria's cease-fire has faltered further after an aid convoy was hit by airstrikes, with activists saying a number of people were killed in the attack, mostly truck drivers and Red Crescent workers. (Sept. 20) AP
19 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Raw: Coalition airstrike destroys 168 Da'esh oil tankers | 0:28
Operation Inherent Resolve supported Iraqi security forces with airstrikes Dec. 8, 2016 that aimed to destroy 168 Da'esh oil tanker trucks in central Syria to degrade Da'esh revenue sources to fund terrorism. DVIDS
20 of 44

x
CLOSE

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR What it's like for a 7-year-old living in a war zone | 1:23
Bana is a 7-year-old girl living in war-torn Syria. She started tweeting about her daily life, showing devastating images of the bombings happening near her and her family. Upworthy
21 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Kerry to try again with Russia on Syria talks | 0:57
US Secretary of State John Kerry says he will try to get Syrian peace talks going again with Russia's help as government forces closed in on rebels in the besieged city of Aleppo. Video provided by AFP Newslook
22 of 44

x
CLOSE

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR The U.S. is sending 200 more troops to Syria to battle ISIS | 0:38
U.S. Defense Secretary Ash Carter said Saturday that as many as 200 more American troops are being sent to Syria to help Kurdish and Arab fighters capture the ISIS group’s key stronghold of Raqqa. Time
23 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR These women are fighting ISIS | 1:04
Women fighters aren't uncommon in Iraq and Syria, but one has turned to some pretty extreme methods. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
24 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Airstrikes hit aid Convoy in Syria | 0:51
Airstrikes hit a U.N. Humanitarian convoy in Syria on Monday. At least 12 people are reported dead, mostly humanitarian aid workers. It is unclear who launched the attack, although Russian and Syrian aircraft are known to operate in the area. (Sept. 20) AP
25 of 44

x
CLOSE

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Google to help George and Amal Clooney educate Syrian refugee children in Lebanon | 0:39
George and Amal Clooney are launching an ambitious initiative to educate Syrian refugee children in Lebanon - and they are getting started with a big injection of cash and brain power from Google. USA TODAY
26 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Kerry: Syria Truce 'Holding but Fragile' | 0:23
Calling the Syrian ceasefire "fragile," Secretary of State John Kerry says humanitarian aid trucks are moving to some beseiged cities. (Sept. 19) AP
27 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Syrian ceasefire on brink of collapse | 0:38
For the first time in nearly a week, strikes hit rebel-held areas of Aleppo following a U.S.-led raid that killed scores of Syrian regime soldiers. The US has said it believed it was striking Islamic State group fighters. Video provided by AFP Newslook
28 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Soldiers replace tourists in Aleppo's battered old city | 2:29
Instead of colourful, handmade caps for sale to Syrians and foreign tourists, Zakaria Mosuli -- the last tailor in Aleppo's battered Old City -- now sews military headwear almost exclusively for soldiers. Video provided by AFP Newslook
29 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Raw: UN Cars Enter Syria, Aid Stuck At Border | 1:00
Cars emblazoned with the logo of the United Nations were seen crossing from Turkey into Syria via the Cilvegozu border gate on Saturday. UN aid trucks have been stuck in the customs area for several days, waiting to deliver aid in Syria. (Sept. 17) AP
30 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR UN urges Syria regime to allow aid deliveries | 1:07
The UN Syria envoy urges the Damascus government to allow humanitarian aid deliveries indicating the regime has broken its pledges on the distribution of life-saving supplies. Video provided by AFP Newslook
31 of 44

x
CLOSE

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR US-Russia plan 'may be last chance to save Syria, says Kerry | 1:01
US Secretary of State John Kerry urges Syria's warring parties to observe a US-Russian brokered ceasefire and warned it could be a last chance to save the country. Video provided by AFP Newslook
32 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Another cease-fire begins in Syria | 1:33
The cease-fire began Monday at sundown, and Secretary of State John Kerry is cautiously optimistic. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
33 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Syria truce: Calm has returned to rebel-held parts of Aleppo | 0:37
In Aleppo's rebel-held neighbourhoods, residents experience a rare day of calm following the implementation of a ceasefire billed as the "last chance" for peace in Syria. Video provided by AFP Newslook
34 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Dozens treated for breathing problems after Syria attack | 0:45
Dozens of people had to be treated for breathing problems in the Syrian battlefront city of Aleppo after regime helicopters dropped barrel bombs on a rebel-held district, a monitor said. Video provided by AFP Newslook
35 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Kerry: 'Syria Breakthrough not Built on Trust' | 1:47
Secretary of State, John Kerry spelled out his views about the ceasefire agreement that has been negotiated to bring a stop to the fighting in Syria. Kerry said, "no one is building this based on trust." (Sept. 10) AP
36 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Raw: Syrian Military Launches Aleppo Offensive | 1:04
Syrian pro-government forces backed by airstrikes launched a wide offensive in the northern city of Aleppo on Sunday, capturing areas they lost last month and almost besieging rebel-held neighborhoods, state media and opposition activists said. (Sept. 4) AP
37 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR ISIS: top-tier leader Abu Mohammed al-Adnani killed in Aleppo | 0:27
Islamic State spokesman Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, one of the jihadist group’s longest-serving officials, has been killed in Aleppo in Syria, its Amaq News Agency reported on Tuesday. WIBBITZ
38 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Raw: Explosions in Syria Kills Dozens | 0:54
Syrian state media reports that several bombings in government-controlled territory have killed more than three dozen people. Islamic State militants claimed responsibility for at least one of the bombings. (Sept. 5) AP
39 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR No humanitarian convoys in Syria in a month | 1:12
Aid convoys have not reached Syria's besieged areas with desperately needed food and medicine for the past month, the UN envoy to the war-ravaged country, Staffan de Mistura, says. Video provided by AFP Newslook
40 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Raw: Turkish forces launch offensive in Syria | 1:09
Turkey's state-run Anadolu Agency said on Wednesday that Turkish tanks have crossed into Syria as part of a military operation to free a border town held by the Islamic State group. (Aug. 24) AP
41 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Raw: Fighting intensifies around Aleppo | 1:17
Fighting intensified around Aleppo on Wednesday as Syrian government forces used rocket propelled grenades and tanks to try and dislodge the opposition. (Aug. 3) AP
42 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR Wounded Syrian child sparks social media outrage | 0:39
The Aleppo Media Center published a video showing a child that it said had been rescued after strikes on a area in rebel-held eastern Aleppo. The images of the child covered in dust and blood in the ambulance have brought the spotlight on the plight of civilians in Syria's conflict-hit second city. Video provided by AFP Newslook
43 of 44

THE SYRIAN CIVIL WAR At least 11 killed in airstrikes west of Aleppo | 0:35
At least 11 people, including five children, are killed in air strikes on the rebel-held town of Atareb west of Aleppo, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. Video provided by AFP Newslook
44 of 44
 Haunting images from the Syrian conflict 

 What is happening in the Syrian Civil War 

 Tillerson: 'No doubt' Assad behind Syria attack 

 Trump toughens talk on Syria after chemical attack 

 Haley: Russia needs to 'do their job' in Syria 

 Trump: Syria attack 'crossed many lines' 

 U.N. resolution seeks Syrian information on attack 

 Children reportedly killed along with dozens in Syrian gas attack 

 WH: Syria attack a result of Obama's 'weakness' 

 Save the children sounds the alarm on Syrian child deaths 

 Raw: Death toll rises in Syria chemical attack 

 At least 21 dead after an airstrike on Syria's Idlib 

 Syrian regime accused of slaughtering civilians as Aleppo nears fall 

 Twin blasts kill 40 in Syria's capital 

 North Syria exodus continues as families flee assault on IS 

 Syrians trapped in Aleppo plead for help on social media 

 Syrian army evacuates residents of recaptured Aleppo old city 

 ISIS Has Recaptured Palmyra, Syrian Activists Say 

 Raw: Aid convoy hit by airstrike near Aleppo 

 Raw: Coalition airstrike destroys 168 Da'esh oil tankers 

 What it's like for a 7-year-old living in a war zone 

 Kerry to try again with Russia on Syria talks 

 The U.S. is sending 200 more troops to Syria to battle ISIS 

 These women are fighting ISIS 

 Airstrikes hit aid Convoy in Syria 

 Google to help George and Amal Clooney educate Syrian refugee children in Lebanon 

 Kerry: Syria Truce 'Holding but Fragile' 

 Syrian ceasefire on brink of collapse 

 Soldiers replace tourists in Aleppo's battered old city 

 Raw: UN Cars Enter Syria, Aid Stuck At Border 

 UN urges Syria regime to allow aid deliveries 

 US-Russia plan 'may be last chance to save Syria, says Kerry 

 Another cease-fire begins in Syria 

 Syria truce: Calm has returned to rebel-held parts of Aleppo 

 Dozens treated for breathing problems after Syria attack 

 Kerry: 'Syria Breakthrough not Built on Trust' 

 Raw: Syrian Military Launches Aleppo Offensive 

 ISIS: top-tier leader Abu Mohammed al-Adnani killed in Aleppo 

 Raw: Explosions in Syria Kills Dozens 

 No humanitarian convoys in Syria in a month 

 Raw: Turkish forces launch offensive in Syria 

 Raw: Fighting intensifies around Aleppo 

 Wounded Syrian child sparks social media outrage 

 At least 11 killed in airstrikes west of Aleppo 
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2oByHRj
