Major hotel brand to let guests earn points for ordering food, dining out
Loyal members of InterContinental Hotels Group can now earn points for ordering food on Grubhub or making dinner reservations through OpenTable.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 3 Shares 




Loyal members of InterContinental Hotels Group can now earn points for ordering food on Grubhub or making dinner reservations through OpenTable.
IHG Rewards Club members will have to use IHG channels—the IHG mobile app, the company website or IHG Connect, its on-property Wi-Fi—to make orders and reservations.
Grubhub is a mobile-food ordering company and OpenTable is a leading provider of online restaurant reservations.
A number of hotel companies have been partnering with online food ordering services to provide guests with an alternative to room service, which has never been much of a money-maker for the industry.
For instance, earlier this year Hawthorn Suites by Wyndham, Wyndham Hotel Group’s extended stay brand, enlisted chefs to come up with recipes for guests to cook in their rooms. Wyndham launched a pilot program letting guests get groceries delivered to their rooms from Instacart and Peapod.
Hyatt Centric has also partnered with Grubhub to let guests order from restaurants selected by hotel employees. 
IHG’s Grubhub option will be offered at more than 1,000 hotels across the USA. for guests staying at IHG’s Holiday Inn Express, Staybridge Suites and Candlewood Suites brands. Staybridge and Candlewood are IHG’s extended stay options.
The OpenTable partnership will go global. Starting now, IHG Rewards Club members can access OpenTable to make reservations at any participating restaurants in the USA. By the end of this year, the restaurant options will expand to the United Kingdom and Australia.
“The collaboration with Grubhub is about making their entire travel journey easier and more seamless. Now, they can order takeout or delivery to the hotel and get rewarded for doing so,” says Liz Crisafi, head of loyalty, partnerships and portfolio marketing at IHG. “For our extended stay guests in particular, who are often at our hotels for weeks or months at a time, this collaboration with Grubhub gives them the chance to explore the neighborhood and try new restaurants when they don’t want to cook in their suite.”
This is how the reward system will work: Members will earn 500 points for their first completed OpenTable reservation at any restaurant made via IHG channels.
With each subsequent completed reservation, they will earn 300 points for dining at a restaurant at any IHG hotel. That is in addition to the 10 points they already earn for every dollar spent at restaurants at IHG hotels, excluding those at Kimpton Hotels and Restaurants, and billed to their folio. They can earn 150 points for any other non-IHG restaurant.
Members will earn 500 points the first time they order from Grubhub via IHG channels and 250 points for each subsequent Grubhub transaction.
“It’s important to offer opportunities to earn points throughout the travel experience, and that’s why we constantly look for ways to provide unique and exciting rewards for our members, to meet their needs throughout the entire travel process, not just when they’re staying at our hotels,” Crisafi says.

 New York City’s Algonquin Hotel opened in 1902, and guests have enjoyed drinks and light bites in the lobby ever since. Over the years, celebrities like James Dean and Ella Fitzgerald have visited – Fitzgerald is said to have sometimes sung for guests enjoying breakfast. courtesy of Algonquin Hotel
