National parks and lands: Contest-winning photos
Every Kid in a Park: Joshua Slezak snapped this pic of his little brother fishing in the golden hours at Oologah Lake in Oklahoma. The lake provides a great getaway for fishing, boating, picnicking, camping and family fun. While Slezak and his family arrived at the lake later in the day than they would have liked, “All in all it was an evening well spent with family.” Joshua Slezak, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Historical: Wanting to get some sunset and night shots of the Hoover Dam and the new Mike O'Callaghan-Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge, Michael McCook jumped in his Jeep one afternoon when he noticed interesting clouds. Good thing he did because he won the historical category for this photo of the Hoover Dam lit up at night as the last light of day lingers in the pink clouds. Michael McCook, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Night Skies: Amateur photographer Matthew Hanna won the night sky category for this beautiful pic of the Milky Way stretching above the seastacks at Oregon Islands National Wildlife Refuge. Spanning the Oregon coast, the wilderness islands and windswept headlands of Oregon Islands National Wildlife Refuge are celebrated for their abundant wildlife, rugged grandeur and amazing night skies. Matthew Hanna, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Scenic: Fantasy Canyon is aptly named -- it's like a sculpture gallery dedicated to erosional flights of fancy with sandstone formations are unbelievably intricate. John D’Onofrio found the area to be a difficult area to photograph but on a recent trip, he noticed the almost ghostly illumination of moonlight on the strange formations and was transfixed. “I've been a life-long pilgrim on our public lands … I believe that finding and nurturing deeply-felt connections to the natural world is an antidote to the stress-inducing pace of modern life.” John D’Onofrio, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Wildlife: The wildlife winner goes to this pic of a stately owl staring at the camera. Of this lucky moment at Yellowstone National Park, photographer Matthew Sorum says, “When I shared the photo with friends on social media, it had a tremendous amount of positive responses from everyone. I appreciate that these lands are carefully managed to allow all visitors to view them and their inhabitants as Mother Nature created them.” Matthew Sorum, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Fan Favorite, 2nd place: The 2nd place fan favorite went to Rob Blair for this dreamy photo of Blue Hen Falls at Cuyahoga Valley National Park. For anyone visiting this Ohio park, Blue Hen Falls is one of the top 5 must-see locations. There's nothing quite like seeing it in the peak of the fall foliage. Rob Blair, www.sharetheexperience.org
 3rd place: For Christopher Regala and his wife, experiencing new places and public lands is best done through the eyes of their son. On this occasion, Christopher and family visited Utah’s Zion National Park for their annual family reunion. It was decided that The Narrows, the narrowest section of Zion Canyon carved by the Virgin River, would be that day’s hike for all the cousins. As the group hiked up the canyon, Christopher took this picture of his son on his smart phone, having left his new camera back at camp to avoid any water mishaps. “I love the colors of the canyons and the water, and the look on his face – it’s a mixture of awe and exhaustion. Although tired, he persevered.” Christopher Regala, www.sharetheexperience.org
 2nd place: Early morning fog sits low over the water at Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness in Minnesota’s Superior National Forest in the 2nd place winner. An avid photographer for 35 years, Gary Hamer’s camera equipment often replaces his fishing equipment when he heads into the backcountry. Such was the case on this recent trip when he captured the final day of the group’s seven-day journey as friends set-off to paddle across Lizz Lake. “One of my favorite parts of wilderness paddling is arriving at the next lake and seeing what is around the corner. I think this particular photo captures that feeling as they are just hitting the water after portage.” Hamer said he got lucky with this photo because his camera lens fogged up as he pulled it from his bag. After quickly clearing the lens, he captured this serene moment. Gary Hamer, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Grand Prize: Craig McIntyre is the grand prize winner of the 2016 Share The Experience photo contest for this unique picture of a frog at Aransas National Wildlife Refuge in Texas, which photo will appear on the 2018 America the Beautiful public lands pass. As a self-taught photographer, Craig McIntyre has been dabbling in wildlife photography since the early 1970s. Visiting the refuge once or twice a week during the summer, Craig walks the trails and boardwalks, binoculars and camera at the ready. “I like photographing the frogs because they’re artistic – little reptiles and amphibians are gorgeous to me. I’ve been studying them for 60 years now – patterns, designs and their behavior all fascinate me.” Craig McIntyr, www.sharetheexperience.org
Last SlideNext Slide

The U.S. Department of the Interior has announced the winners for their annual Share the Experience photo contest. Each year, the Department of the Interior invites visitors to the lands run by the National Park Service, the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Reclamation, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the U.S. Forest Service to submit their favorite photos, with winners chosen in several categories. This past year's contest categories included Historic, Adventure, Night Skies, Scenic, Wildlife and Fan Favorite, as well as third, second and grand prize winners overall. The grand prize winning photo gives the photographer a $10,000 prize, and will be highlighted in the 2018 Annual Federal Recreation Lands Pass. Want to submit your own favorite photo? Go to SharetheExperience.org for your own chance to win next year's contest.
After seeing which photos won this year's contest, scroll through the gallery below to check out past year's winners:

 Night Skies, 2014: It’s not a surprise that this breathtaking pic of the Milky Way over Mount Rainier National Park is the Night Skies winner for the 2014 content. The Milky Way rises out of the summer of Mount Rainier. The streaks of light on the mountain: Climbers getting an alpine start and heading towards the summit. Stephen Byrne, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Let’s Move, 2014: This photo at Virgin Islands National Park won the Let’s Move category. Of the picture, Nancy Reynolds says: “This was our kids' first trip to warm waters. We wanted to do a little more than snorkel, but the youngest was too young for scuba. We discovered that the kids could do snuba and gave it a try on our first day. It was a huge hit! We saw lots of sea life as well as different types of coral.” Nancy Reynolds, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Historical, 2014: A beautiful photo of a sunrise over Gettysburg National Military Park won the historical category in 2014. The Battle of Gettysburg was a turning point in the Civil War, the Union victory that ended General Robert E. Lee's second and most ambitious invasion of the North. A visit to this park will teach you about the Battle of Gettysburg and this critical time in the U.S.’s history. Matthew Sunderland, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Scenic, 2014: The sun illuminates the Keyhole Arch as waves roll up on Pfeiffer Beach State Park at the Los Padres National Forest in Big Sur, California. The sea has cut a unique shape into the rock formation that transforms it into a golden door during the right time of year and day. Susan Kim, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Adventure, 2014: Thomas Haney won best photo in the adventure category in 2014 by capturing two paddleboarders enjoying a ride on a stunning and cold lake at Montana’s Glacier National Park. In the hopes of a beautiful sunrise, Thomas spent his last morning at the park on the shore of Lake McDonald. “As the first hints of color began creeping into the clouds, two people set paddleboards in the water and paddled out into the lake. At first I thought my shot was ruined and started to walk away, but then I realized the scene's potential and rushed back to the shore, and was able to get this shot,” he says. Thomas Haney, www.sharetheexperience.org
 3rd place, 2014: The 3rd Prize in the 2014 Share The Experience contest went to this great pic of a bison at Yellowstone National Park. Jordan Moore took this photo in front of a still frozen Yellowstone Lake near sunset. The warm evening light lit up the bison, highlighting his impeccable muscles and strength. Jordan Moore, www.sharetheexperience.org
 2nd place, 2014: Golden hour at Golden Gate National Recreation Area in California is magical. Photographer Eric DaBreo was in search of the the perfect sunset when he took this pic of the Golden Gate Bridge from the park’s Marshall Beach. This beauty took 2nd place in the 2014 Share The Experience photo contest. Eric DaBreo, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Grand Prize, 2014: Gregory Cameron Teller captured this touching moment between a polar bear cub and its mother along the coast of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska. “We stayed a couple of days in a village in the refuge where bear’s frequented this part of the landscape. Moments with mothers and their cubs were just perfect; especially this shot as the cub reached up to his mother.” Photography is a hobby for Teller and he is a frequent visitor to our nation's federal lands. Teller’s photo is the winner of the 2014 Share the Experience photo contest. Gregory Cameron Teller, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Night Skies, 2015: Bathed in starlight from the Milky Way, the unique rock formations of Badlands National Park in South Dakota glow in the darkness. The ancient landscape and fascinating fossil beds make this place seem timeless. This stunning photo was the winner in the night skies category of the 2015 Share the Experience photo contest, which gives amateur photographers the chance to showcase their skills by capturing the beauty of the nation’s public lands. Erik Fremstad, www.sharetheexperience.org)
 Scenic, 2015: This out-of-this-world pic of Ah-shi-sle-pah Wilderness Study Area by Steve Ancik is the scenic winner in the 2015 Share The Experience photo contest. The New Mexico landmark protects spectacular badlands of rolling water-carved clay hills that show colors rarely seen elsewhere. With little vegetation to conceal geological formations, it's easy to spot the area's rich fossils. Steve Ancik, www.sharetheexperience.org
 3rd place, 2015: Welcome to the hottest, driest, lowest place in North America: Death Valley National Park. The park is a land of extremes, and Sarah Gustafson's stunning pic -- the 3rd place winner of the Share The Experience photo contest -- captured the grandeur of the salt flats perfectly. Taken during a solo camping trip over Memorial Day weekend last year, the storm clouds over the park cleared just long enough for Sarah to take a self portrait that shows the scope and breadth of this magnificent landscape. Sarah Gustafson, www.sharetheexperience.org
 2nd place, 2015: It’s rare enough to see one bighorn sheep, let alone five posing against the perfect backdrop of a dreamy pastel sunset! This amazing photo of Joshua Tree National Park in California by Koustubh Kulkarni won second place in the 2015 Share the Experience photo contest. Of the experience, Kulkarni says: “My wife first spotted the bighorn sheep in distance. As we approached they got curious about us as much as we were about them and chose a high perch to observe their oncoming visitors. Their perch could not have been better as it had a backdrop of the setting sun with the sky shaded in beautiful hues of orange, yellow, pink and blue. The magnificent backdrop was just perfect and in this picture it almost looks like the sheep stopped to pose for us.” Koustubh Kulkarni, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Grand Prize, 2015: Here’s a spectacular sunrise over Reflection Canyon -- a surreal landscape of the twisting and winding Colorado River through colorful sandstone cliffs. This amazing photo, captured by Yang Lu, is the grand prize winner of the 2015 Share the Experience photo contest. For Yang, photography isn’t just about recreation, it’s also to inspire people to explore these special areas. Yang took this photo during a two-day backpacking trip to Reflection Canyon, which is located in a remote area at Glen Canyon National Recreation Area in Utah. “We did not see anybody for two days. There is no trail; we depended on my research,” Yang says of the experience. Yang visited during the winter when the temperature and water levels were low -- thanks to meticulous planning, Yang’s efforts paid off. The curves and those formations -- I have never seen anywhere.” Yang Lu, www.sharetheexperience.org
