Putin's inner circle: Treasury report on Kremlin-connected Russians due Monday
WASHINGTON — Russia’s rich and powerful are closely watching for a Treasury Department report due Monday listing those who make up Russian President Vladimir Putin’s inner circle and their alleged corrupt practices.
The report to Congress was mandated by the sanctions bill President Trump reluctantly signed last summer in retaliation for what U.S. intelligence agencies conclude was Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election.
Special counsel Robert Mueller is investigating possible collusion between Trump campaign aides and Russian operatives in trying to influence the election. Trump and Putin have repeatedly denied any such involvement. 
The report is intended to “name and shame” Russia’s elite who prop up Putin, and to send a message “that Putin’s aggression in terms of Russian interference in our elections will be very costly to them,” said Daniel Fried, a former assistant secretary of State who led the State Department Russia sanctions office.
The law calls for a roadmap to corruption in Russia, including the most significant political figures as determined by their closeness to the Russian regime and their net worth, and their relationship to Putin and his associates. The law also requires the report to include the sources of income of those wealthy businessmen, their spouses, children, parents and siblings and non-Russian business affiliations.
It is likely to signal to Russia’s political and business classes that they’d be better off maintaining a distance from the Putin government, and it could lead to further sanctions against individuals who participate in corruption, Fried said.
“The Russian elite reacted with something between anxiety and panic about the prospect of this list,” Fried said. “They focused on this immediately and they’re very worried about it.”
Putin in September invited 50 of these men, known as oligarchs because of their vast wealth and influence, to the Kremlin to discuss the future of Russia’s economy, according to the Kremlin website and Russian media.
In December, Putin said the oligarchs at that meeting asked for “convenient mechanisms to bring capital back into Russian jurisdiction.” The Russian president said he would offer Russian foreign-currency bonds for that purpose, Bloomberg reported.
Russia’s Deputy Prime Minister Arkady Dvorkovich said Wednesday that the list and the potential of new sanctions are “not our choice. We regard them as counterproductive and senseless,” according to Russia’s official news site TASS.
Dvorkovich downplayed the long-term impact and utility of past sanctions, imposed over Russia’s military support for Ukrainian separatists and its seizure of Ukraine’s Crimean Province, human rights violations and corruption.
While U.S. diplomats “steer clear of dialog” and European leaders “have had a distaste for this state of affairs with sanctions for a long time,” the Russian economy is adapting to sanctions and bounced back from the decline of the past two years, with growth in agriculture and a decline in interest rates, he said.
Russia’s well-connected billionaires have hired law firms to try to keep them off the list, said Ariel Cohen, a Russia analyst at the Atlantic Council think tank. Russians believe the list is a first step toward increasing the current 29 Russians under U.S. sanctions by adding 40 to 400 names, Cohen added. 
Cohen said the list will hurt Russia’s ability to trade and attract investments.“We are pretty effectively creating a climate that impedes Russian growth,” he said.
People will be evaluated for the list based on their closeness to those in charge at the Kremlin, as well as by their involvement in the government’s aggressive actions, including its military involvement in Ukraine, Georgia, Syria and Chechnya, and alleged murders of political opponents, journalists and activists, according to a paper published by the Atlantic Council.
The law also calls for the report to include a description of key sectors of the U.S. economy that are exposed to such Russian individuals or entities under Kremlin influence, the U.S. banking, securities, insurance, and real estate sectors.
Landing on the list is likely to create a chain reaction of consequences that will hurt business for people who are on it, said Erich Ferrari, a Washington-based lawyer. 
Ferrari, who has fielded several inquiries from Russian media about the criteria for who will be included, described how an unnamed bank that he represented was impacted by a similar situation.
“Public allegations came up that they were conducting transactions for a sanctioned party,” Ferrari said.
Even though the bank wasn’t included on a sanctions' list, media reports about the allegations spooked some of its foreign partners, who decided to stop doing business with Ferrari’s client.
“Losing those relationships would be devastating to a bank trying to do international business,” he said.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2DKZxgV
