2,000 veterans to give protesters a break at Standing Rock
DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Standing Rock Sioux tribe leader asks activists to go home | 1:01
The request came a day after the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers said it would look into alternative pipeline routes. Newsy
1 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Fight over Dakota Access Pipeline far from over | 0:52
As Standing Rock protesters rejoice over the decision to halt construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline, questions remain. USA TODAY NETWORK
2 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Standing Rock celebrates as US Army Corps stops pipeline construction | 0:39
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers announced it will not allow the easement necessary for the Dakota Access Pipeline to be built near reservation lands. Newslook
3 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Raw: Snow, wind hit Dakota pipeline protest site | 0:48
Strong winds and blowing snow are blasting much of northwestern and south-central North Dakota. The weather is affecting the Dakota Access Pipeline protest site. (Dec. 6) AP
4 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Legend reacts to latest North Dakota pipeline news | 1:20
John Legend welcomes the news that the Corps of Engineers is reconsidering their decision to put a $3.8 billion pipeline in North Dakota. (Dec. 6) AP
5 of 18

x
CLOSE

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS The battle over the Dakota Access Pipeline might not be over just yet | 1:09
The decision to halt construction comes just before President-elect Donald Trump is set to take office. And he could decide to move forward with it. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
6 of 18

x
CLOSE

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS DAPL protesters plan to stay despite the risks of a harsh winter | 1:00
The camp has seen rigid temperatures, threats of arrest and a blockade. Newslook
7 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS The current route for the Dakota Access pipeline won't be approved | 0:32
The 1,172-mile pipeline would have passed under Lake Oahe, a reservoir on the Missouri River. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
8 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS U.S. Army Says Dakota Access Pipeline Not Allowed Under Lake Oahe | 0:49
The U.S. Army has denied an easement for the Dakota Access Pipeline to be built under Lake Oahe Time
9 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Deadline Looms for Standing Rock Protesters | 1:11
Authorities in North Dakota have said they'll move away from a key bridge near the main Dakota Access oil pipeline protest camp by Sunday if demonstrators agree to certain conditions. (Dec. 4) AP
10 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Months later, DAPL protests ongoing and violent | 1:38
The scene at Standing Rock Sioux Reservation in North Dakota has turned ugly as thousands of Native Americans and supporters gather in solidarity against the Dakota Access Pipeline. USA TODAY NETWORK
11 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Helping DAPL protesters could get you a $1,000 fine | 1:09
Anybody taking supplies to Dakota Access Pipeline protesters could face a $1,000 fine. Newslook
12 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Dakota pipeline protesters ordered to vacate Standing Rock | 0:53
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers says all Dakota Access Pipeline protesters have until Dec. 5 to leave the area. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
13 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Police battle protestors at Dakota Access pipeline | 0:38
Protesters and police clashed again on the Dakota Access pipeline as protesters tried to push past the Backwater Bridge. A line of law enforcement using water cannon and what appeared to be tear gas turned back the protesters. USA TODAY
14 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Bernie Sanders asks Obama to declare Standing Rock a national monument | 1:40
Bernie Sanders called for action from President Obama as more than 300 cities across the world held #NoDAPL rallies. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
15 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS North Dakota's congressional race is a symbolic one for Standing Rock | 1:14
The incumbent has sided with the company building the Dakota Access Pipeline, while his challenger is from Standing Rock. Newslook
16 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Protests heat up over North Dakota oil pipeline | 0:35
What's at stake in the Dakota Access Pipeline debate. USA TODAY NETWORK
17 of 18

DAKOTA PIPELINE PROTESTS Shailene Woodley livestreams her own arrest on Facebook | 0:57
Woodley, who streamed her arrest via Facebook Live, is being charged with criminal trespassing Time
18 of 18
 Standing Rock Sioux tribe leader asks activists to go home 

 Fight over Dakota Access Pipeline far from over 

 Standing Rock celebrates as US Army Corps stops pipeline construction 

 Raw: Snow, wind hit Dakota pipeline protest site 

 Legend reacts to latest North Dakota pipeline news 

 The battle over the Dakota Access Pipeline might not be over just yet 

 DAPL protesters plan to stay despite the risks of a harsh winter 

 The current route for the Dakota Access pipeline won't be approved 

 U.S. Army Says Dakota Access Pipeline Not Allowed Under Lake Oahe 

 Deadline Looms for Standing Rock Protesters 

 Months later, DAPL protests ongoing and violent 

 Helping DAPL protesters could get you a $1,000 fine 

 Dakota pipeline protesters ordered to vacate Standing Rock 

 Police battle protestors at Dakota Access pipeline 

 Bernie Sanders asks Obama to declare Standing Rock a national monument 

 North Dakota's congressional race is a symbolic one for Standing Rock 

 Protests heat up over North Dakota oil pipeline 

 Shailene Woodley livestreams her own arrest on Facebook 

Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story didn't make clear the location of Lake Oahe.
Thousands of U.S. veterans will descend this weekend on the site in North Dakota where Native Americans have been protesting the construction of a pipeline that would threaten water and their land.
Some 2,000 veterans will join demonstrations against the Dakota Access Pipeline with the idea of giving a break to protesters who have engaged in the standoff for months. The veterans also want to call attention to the violent treatment that law enforcement has waged on the protesters, according to Veterans Stand for Standing Rock.
"We want to offer them a moment of peace and, if we can, take a little bit of pressure off," said Ashleigh Jennifer Parker, a Coast Guard veteran and spokeswoman for Veterans Stand for Standing Rock.
Two-thousand veterans have signed up and the Oceti Sakowin protesters' campsite cannot hold more veterans than that, but about 1,000 more have said they plan to come, Parker said. The veterans plan to set up on Dec. 4 and will stay at least through Dec. 7, she said. She later added that some would remain indefinitely at Standing Rock.
"The militarized police paid for by tax dollars ... is unconstitutional," Parker said.
"People are being brutalized; concussion grenades are being thrown into crowds," Parker said. "They're spraying people, even old women, and other elders of the tribe with tear gas and pepper spray and all of this is just unconstitutional. I can't believe the media hasn't taken more of an interest in this."
Protesters say the $3.8 billion, 1,172-mile pipeline that would stretch underneath a lake bordering the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation -would threaten water resources and sacred Native American sites. The pipeline is owned by Energy Transfer Partners LP, out of Texas, and is mostly constructed except for the stretch planned to go under Lake Oahe.
North Dakota Gov. Jack Dalrymple has said it is most likely too late to reroute the project, but he would like to restore a relationship with the Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Council. On Nov. 10, Dalrymple called on the White House to end the standoff.
"A federal decision on the project’s easement is long overdue,” Dalrymple said in a statement. “Further delays simply prolong the risks to public safety, prolong the hardships endured by area residents and increase costs incurred by the state of North Dakota and Morton County.”
On Monday, North Dakota state officials ordered the camp vacated, saying the cold makes it dangerous for protesters to stay there. But law enforcement has continued to allow vehicles to enter the site.
The veterans say their action will not be violent and they will have no weapons.
"We will be unarmed, completely prepared for peaceful protest," Parker said. "We don't even like the word 'protest.' We're there to help the water protectors," she said, referring to the phrase that has come to describe the protesters.
The veterans' action came about after veteran Michael Wood, a former police officer, and Wesley Clark, a veteran and screenwriter, set up a crowdfunding campaign on GoFundMe.com to raise money to help veterans support the Standing Rock protests. As of Wednesday night, the campaign had raised $692,240.
The organizers said they believe that if they are treated violently, it will draw more attention to the clashes that have been happening at the protest site.
"We’re hoping if we stand together in formation and look the aggressors in their face ... if they can treat us the same way (as they have the protesters) then that should showcase to the American people what's going on up there," Parker said.
