Six tips for a more comfortable flight
CLOSE

 Air travel is the fastest way to cover ground, but it can be an unpleasant experience. Here are three tips to make your trip more comfortable. USA TODAY

Some people settle with the idea that flying is an uncomfortable experience, but that doesn’t need to be the case. And while we don’t have tricks for avoiding nosey seatmates who steal the armrest, we do have some simple tips that can make your journey a little more comfortable.
Choose the right plane
We all look at flight times and prices, but have you ever considered the plane make and model? If not, maybe you should. If you are prone to altitude sickness when flying, buy a seat on the Boeing 787 Dreamliner or the Airbus A350. The cabins on these planes are pressurized about 2,000 feet lower than on other commercial airliners. You’ll find that you breathe easier and sleep better on long flights. The interiors of these planes are also more humid so your nasal passages and eyes, if you wear contacts, will be more comfortable.
 No. 16: Toronto-Addis Ababa, Ethiopia* (7,169 miles); Ethiopian Airlines. Block time of 13 hours. (* = Only the eastbound flight operates non-stop; the westbound flight from Addis Ababa makes a stop in Dublin, Ireland, en route to Toronto; data from OAG.) Jenny Vaughan, AFP/Getty Images
 No. 2: Shanghai-Mexico City* (8,041 miles); Aeromexico. Block time of 15 hours, 55 minutes. (* = Only the eastbound flight operates non-stop; the westbound flight from Mexico City makes a stop in Tijuana, Mexico, en route to Shanghai; data from OAG.) Pedro Pardo, AFP/Getty Images
Center yourself
If you’re prone to air sickness, try to get a seat over the wings. It’s like sitting on the fulcrum of a seesaw: There’s less motion up and down.
 
Plug ‘em up
Wear ear plugs, and not just when you're trying to sleep. You may not realize how loud the engines are because the sound comes off as background noise, but according to the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA), the sound is typically around 85 decibels (dB) at cruising and can reach 120 dB at takeoff and landing. The sound could affect your sleep, or unknowingly cause stress. If the sound really bothers you, pick a seat in front of the wings, which tends to be a little quieter.
Shut it out
Eye shades are great for sleeping, especially as seat mates may have the glowing screens of their phones, laptops or seat-back TVs turned on during the flight. Pro tip: Eye shades also do the trick for avoiding a talkative seatmate.
No drinks onboard
Hate to kill the fun, but you should avoid drinking alcohol too. Sure, it may ease your nerves, but flying already makes you dehydrated and alcohol only exacerbates the problem. Save the booze for a toast upon your arrival.
Monitor screen time
Finally, limit (or even go without) screen time. The blue screens and light can impact your sleep. Instead, kick it old school with a good book. Or, better yet, a boring one if shuteye is your goal.

 How to book a hotel the smart way: 1. Start with a thorough search. Check an online travel agency like Expedia or Booking.com or call your travel agent. Check the rate against the price your preferred hotel would charge if you book direct. 2. Review the restrictions.  You might be better off working with a big agency that has negotiated better terms. 3. Check the incentives. Ask yourself if you really need the points or the upgrade. Red Roof
 Tips on avoiding tips: 1. Take out instead of eating out. If you order takeout, no tip is expected because no table service is provided. 2. Visit a business with a no-tipping policy. But beware: Instead, some "no tipping" restaurants add a mandatory "service charge" of 18% to 20%. 3. Avoid the outstretched hands. (You can.)  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid missing amenities in your vacation rental: 1. Carry a vacation rental emergency kit. If you're staying at a rental, be prepared. Consider an emergency kit with towels, toilet paper, soap and detergent. 2. Consider renting through a service.  3. Just ask. Vacation rental owners can be very accommodating. Getty Images
 How to opt out of aggressive email campaigns: 1. Click the unsubscribe button. Every legitimate email campaign must have one.  2. Say "no" — and say why. Most travel companies will offer a "feedback" option when you opt out of an email campaign.  3. Tell the feds. Complain to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) if a business is emailing you without consent. Under the CAN-SPAM Act, you have the right to end the seemingly relentless emails. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to handle a rude TSA agent: 1. Report the agent to a supervisor. Ask for a Supervisory Transportation Security Officer (STSO) immediately. 2. Complain in writing. You can send an email directly to the TSA (tsa.gov/contact-center/form/complaints). 3. Contact your elected representative. You can contact your representative online at house.gov/representatives/find.  Scott Olson, Getty Images
 Who to call if your travel insurance claim has been denied: 1. Your state insurance commissioner.   2. The Better Business Bureau (BBB).  3. A consumer advocate.   Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid an in-flight emergency: 1. Know when you shouldn't go.  2. Don't fly if you're contagious. 3. Avoid flights that could divert.  Flights to Las Vegas, Miami and Fort Lauderdale may fall into that category. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid wrinkled clothes: 1. Roll, don't fold. It doesn't just save space, it can prevent wrinkles. 2. Spray 'em out. Wrinkle-release sprays can fix travel-related wrinkles in a pinch. 3. Don't overpack — or underpack. “ Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to keep your travel complaint from being ignored: 1. Cite the rules, chapter and verse. If you have a strong case for compensation or a refund, it'll be in the contract. 2. Lawyer up — without lawyering up.  3. Appeal to a company's customer service culture.   Getty Images/iStockphoto
 What standard travel insurance doesn't cover: 1. Pre-existing medical conditions.  2. Changing your mind. Don't want to take the vacation?  3. Psychological or nervous disorders.  4. Partying too hard.  scyther5, Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid visa problems: 1. Mind your expiration dates. Both visas and passports have an expiration date. Be aware of them, and make sure you don't overstay. 2. Take the right photo. Countries are specific about their requirements (no sunglasses, no hats, specific formatting). 3. Remember, a visa isn't a guarantee of admission. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to find the best agent: 1. Ask a friend. A personal recommendation remains the best way to find a competent travel professional. 2. Use an agent finder. The American Society of Travel Agents publishes a directory of its agents at Travelsense.org. Also, check a consortium such as Virtuoso or Travel Leaders. 3. Look for the title.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid a car rental surprise: 1. Read the fine print. Many surprises aren't surprises at all — they're just "gotchas" concealed in the fine print. Look for the "terms and conditions" in small type. Don't ignore them. 2. Ask before you rent. Does your car insurance cover the vehicle? How about your credit card? The only way to know for certain is to ask. If you assume, you may be stuck with an unnecessary bill. 3. Resolve in real time. Don't wait until you get home to fix a bad surprise. Most problems can be resolved at the counter. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to spot a fake review: 1. Check the reviewer's record. Fake reviews are often posted by accounts with little or no additional review history. 2. Show and tell. Talk is cheap, but photos of a resort or restaurant are harder to fake. You might think twice before trusting a detailed review without photos. 3. Look for extremes.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to say no to a tip request: 1. Be polite and firm, but don't over explain. 2. Avoid a confrontation. Restaurants and other establishments generally push you to offer a tip privately. Just leave the tip field on your credit card slip blank or decline to leave extra cash. 3. Use the system to your advantage. For example, can the employee see the tip amount you're authorizing on Square? Not always. If you don't believe you should be tipping, just click the "no tip" field and sign the screen. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid a traffic ticket overseas: 1. Stay out of downtown areas. Restricted zones are largely confined to heavily congested city centers. 2. Do the math.  3. Read the signs. Look for red circles with the words "Zona Traffico Limitato" in them when you're in Italy. In Germany, it's called an "Umweltzone." In Britain, the signs read, "Congestion Charging" and "Central Zone." Getty Images
 How to avoid unfair fees: 1. Single supplement: Some cruise lines offer single cabins. And some tour operators charge modest single supplements. 2.  3. Fuel surcharges: Fortunately, these fees must be included in the price of your ticket.  4. Resort fees: Don't stay at a hotel with resort fees. It's the only way to send a message that you don't tolerate these misrepresentations. Steve Mason, Getty Images
 How to prevent your identity from being stolen: 1. Don't play fast and loose with your ID. Your passport and ID are some of the most important travel documents. Don't leave them in your hotel room.  2. Keep 'em separated. Don't store critical documents in the same place. You may need one in order to replace the other. 3. Upload copies of critical documents online.  Michael Reynolds, EPA
 How to fit more in your suitcase: 1. Cube it. Luggage cubes allow you to compress lots of clothes into a compact space. 2. Vacuum pack it. You'd be surprised how much air is between the clothes in your carry-on.  3. Roll it. Instead of folding your clothes and pushing them into the bag, fold and then roll. Even without a cube or vacuum pack, you'll fit more in your luggage. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid a flight from hell: 1. Avoid connecting and late flights.  2. Know your rights.  Also, check your airline's contract of carriage. 3. Be grateful. Take a deep breath and appreciate the big picture. If your flight lands safely, that's the most important thing. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid a dirty hotel: 1. Set high standards. Stay at a hotel with top-notch reviews or customer service scores. 2. Check in and check out.  Leave and ask for a refund. If you don't get it, dispute the charges on your credit card. 3. Report the hotel.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid a vacation rental surprise: 1. Rent with names you trust. Airbnb, VRBO and FlipKey have legitimate rentals and higher standards. 2. Assume nothing. Every vacation rental comes with linens, right? Wrong. 3. Never wire money. Wiring money can lead to the most unpleasant surprise of all: a rental that doesn't even exist. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to spot hidden fees: 1. Don't get cute.  Why?  2. Use a big screen. Making reservations on a tiny phone screen is just asking for trouble. 3. Review the grand total.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid fees on your rental car: 1.  Either bring your own toll transponder or avoid tolls with a reliable mapping app. 2.  3.  Many GPS navigation systems also come equipped with traffic enforcement warnings. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid smells at hotels: 1. Go hypoallergenic. Stay with a hotel that offers hypoallergenic rooms, which are not scented. Most of the major chains now offer no-smell quarters. 2. If you smell something, say something. Some hotels pump smells into every part of the property. If you're sensitive to scents, don't wait until you're halfway through your visit to complain. 3. Fumigate your own room. If all else fails, open a window, or find the source of the smell and stop it. emera Technologies/Getty Images
 What to do at the airport for free while you wait: 1. See the art. Phoenix Sky Harbor, for example, has an impressive collection of art. 2. Watch the planes. One of the best places to plane-spot is Honolulu International Airport.  3. Take a hike. Stretch your legs before you take off by walking through the airport terminal. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to get an aisle seat: 1. Ask for it.  You can also ask a fellow passenger to switch with you after boarding. 2. Pull the card.  3. Pay for one. Airlines will love this suggestion because they'll make more money from you. But if avoiding a window or aisle is important, you may want to spend a few extra dollars. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to keep your personal information private while traveling: 1. Use a virtual private network. A VPN creates a secure encrypted tunnel between your device and a server somewhere on the Internet.  2. Tell your phone to say "no." Disable location services, Bluetooth and Wi-Fi when possible. 3. Use caution in rental cars.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to find quiet when you travel: 1. Book where there's less noise.  On a train, look for the quiet cars. 2. Block it. Noise canceling headsets can filter out unwanted noise. But if you're serious about avoiding noise pollution, always travel with a pair of earplugs. 3. Timing is everything.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to fight questionable car rental tactics: 1.  That could make you less vulnerable to upgrade, downgrade and option games. 2. Automated check-in kiosks limit the amount of interaction with a salesperson. But pay close attention to what you're agreeing to on the screen. 3.  If you don't, a representative could pressure you — or even deny you the keys to a car. Getty Images/iStockphoto
 How to avoid air rage: 1. Fly early. Experts say alcohol and drugs are a major factor of in-flight incidents. So book an early morning flight to avoid heavily intoxicated passengers. 2. Avoid tight quarters. Use a site such as Routehappy that finds flights based on amenities and comfort. 3. And choose the right seat.  Getty Images/iStockphoto
