New York LaGuardia Airport Guide
Contact information and flight status
Checkpoint savvy
Busiest times at CTB (Central Terminal Building) checkpoints: Weekdays, Monday mornings and Friday afternoons. All concourse checkpoints are busy 5 a.m. to 7 a.m., 9 a.m. to 11 a.m., and noon to 4 p.m. Concourse A: often busy; Concourse D (American) is heavy Friday after 3 p.m.
Workarounds: Check map and terminal location for your airline; each of the four checkpoints serves a specific airline or set of airlines.
Depending on your airline and your status with TSA, expedited TSA PreCheck lanes may be available.
Parking
Most convenient: Hourly/Daily parking: A Parking (uncovered; closest to Terminal A), $59/day, $5/half-hour; B/C/D, $59/day, $5/half hour. See more options.
Least expensive: Long-Term parking, $39/day. See more options.
Cellphone lot: First three hours free in C & D Wait Area.
Transportation to/from city
Most convenient: Taxi to Upper Manhattan, $29 - $37; to Mid-Manhattan, $25-$37; to Lower Manhattan, $32-$37. Tolls, peak surcharges, tips not included. Travel time: About 30 minutes.
As part of a one-year pilot program that began May 2015, Bandwagon’s taxi rideshare priority line is available curbside service at Terminals B and D (and eventually C) during peak travel times, including Thursday, Friday, and Sunday evenings. See more options.
Least expensive: NYCTransit buses (MTA), $2.75. The NYC Airporter runs to Port Authority Bus Terminal, Grand Central Station and Penn Station. Fare: $14/RT $26. See more options.
Wi-Fi and charging stations
Complimentary 30-minute Wi-Fi sessions are available throughout the terminals. Additional fee-based Wi-Fi service available via Boingo. Unlimited Wi-Fi browsing available on the OTG-provided iPads at gates and in restaurants in Terminals C and D.
Power outlets/charging stations: Complimentary power pole stations post-security in the Central Terminal Building in all four concourses. Power outlets/desks at Southwest Gate B2 and United Airlines Gate C9.
Go local
Good choice for local gifts: Terminal B: America, Discover NY. See more options.
Good choice for local food: Terminal B: Sorrentine Panini Bar, Bowery Bay Café, Todd English's Fig's Restaurant. Terminals C and D: Cotto (C39; trattoria favorites), Harry’s Deli (Terminal D Food Hall), Prime Tavern (Terminal D; steakhouse). See more options.
Tips and tidbits
LGA sits on the site of a former amusement park.
There are pet relief areas ("Short Term Barking") outside all terminals. Inside the CTB, there's a full-service post office, and offices offering medical and dental services. In Terminal C, WTGO, a branch of the Warren-Tricomi Salon, offers blow dry services, trims, scalp massages and deep conditioning treatments.
Nearby layover option 
LGA's art-deco Marine Air Terminal is on the National Register of Historic Places and is home to the largest hand-painted WPA-era mural, Flight, by James Brooks. To see it, take the free airport shuttle bus (Route A). Citi Field (the new home of the New York Mets) is about three miles from LGA.
Your tips and picks?
Please share your time- and money-saving tips, favorite restaurants, bars and stores in comments below.
These guides are written by Harriet Baskas, who is the author of six books, including the airport guidebook Stuck at the Airport and a blog of the same name.
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/Sk31Hp
