The Force returns to sea: Disney plans more 'Star Wars' cruises for 2019
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

 The Disney Cruise Line's newest ship, Disney Fantasy, arrived in New York on Feb. 28, 2012 after sailing across the Atlantic Ocean from Germany, where it was built. Getty Images
 While similar in size to the Disney Dream, the Disney Fantasy isn't a carbon copy of the earlier ship. Among interior areas that are different on the Fantasy is the atrium lobby, which has an Art Nouveau theme in contrast to the Art Deco decor of the Disney Dream's lobby. Gene Sloan
 The three-deck-high atrium features a massive crystal chandelier as well as hand-tufted carpets and marble floors. Designed as a central gathering place for passengers, it will offer slightly more public space than its counterpart on the Disney Dream thanks to the elimination of some staff offices. Gene Sloan
 An elegant, 10-person circular table sits at the center of the Royal Court. While it's prominently positioned in the manner of a traditional cruise ship Captain's Table, Disney doesn't call it that as the Disney Fantasy's captain won't regularly eat at it. Gene Sloan
 New on Disney Fantasy is a splash pool area called Satellite Falls that surrounds a satellite fixture at the front of the ship. It features a "rain curtain" of water and is part of an adults-only area that includes new shaded areas for lounging. Gene Sloan
Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries:
Replay

Last SlideNext Slide

Alert all commands: The Force will be strong on nearly a dozen Disney Cruise Line voyages in 2019.
Disney on Wednesday announced its popular Star Wars Day at Sea program would return in 2019 on nine sailings of the Disney Fantasy taking place between January and March. 
Launched in 2016, the Star Wars Day at Sea program brings a full day of Star Wars celebrations that include a deck party with fireworks, meet-and-greets with characters, Star Wars-themed family and youth activities, unique food and beverage offerings, and special merchandise.
Also on the schedule are at-sea screenings of Star Wars films and television series.
During the voyages the ship also will offer a Jedi training program where youngsters can learn light saber moves. Passengers also are encouraged to dress up in Star Wars costumes.
Five of the sailings will be western Caribbean itineraries out of Port Canaveral, Fla. with stops in Cozumel, Mexico; Falmouth, Jamaica; Grand Cayman; and Castaway Cay, Disney’s private island in the Bahamas. The remainder will be eastern Caribbean voyages out of Port Canaveral with stops at Tortola, British Virgin Islands; St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands; and Castaway Cay.
