Money is no longer the biggest incentive in selecting a job
CLOSE

 Millennials in the United States have a different set of values on social and economic topics than the generations before them, according to a new report from the U.S. Census Bureau Time

Corrections & Clarifications: A previous version of this story conflated information about willingness to take a pay cut and the amount willing to be taken.
 Money, it appears, no longer is the biggest thing motivating people to go to work every day. 
At least those are the results of a new survey out from insurer MetLife, which found that nine out of 10 people would choose a company with similar values over a job that pays more. And they are willing to take a pretty big pay cut to make sure those values align with their own. 
The average pay cut employees were willing to take was 21%. The findings were not limited to high-wage earners: People who made less than $50,000 a year also said they still were willing to part with at least some of their salaries for the right company.
“Work is increasingly becoming part of people’s identity,” says Jon Richter, vice president of corporate citizenship for MetLife. “As work and life blend together, work becomes part of a person’s personal brand. People want the workplace to support them and how they view life.”
The survey asked more than 1,000 employees over the age of 21 in a variety of industries what they look for when selecting a place of employment. Three-quarters said they want a company that both supports them financially and acts as a good corporate citizen by demonstrating that it cares about the community and well-being of its people.
The most notable demographic was Millennials, who said they would work for 34% less if it was for a company that supports their views. That’s more than double the amount of pay Baby Boomers would be willing to give up. 
“Millennials care about having an employer be more than just a paycheck,” Richter says. “They want to make a positive difference in the world and carry that into the workplace. It’s an extension of who they are.”
CLOSE

 20-somethings are overqualified, settling for jobs outside their fields, and sometimes struggling to start their career at all. 
Both employees and companies benefit from having shared values, the survey found. Three-quarters of those who worked for a company with similar values reported higher levels of satisfaction with their jobs, were more loyal to their companies and were more likely to stay with the company long term. 
“There’s a tangible bottom-line business impact when employees and companies values match,” Richter says. “The companies that are most likely to succeed have to understand the importance of this.”
CLOSE

 Aside from higher pay, most of the top 5 appear to have average amounts of stress and a fairly average work-life balance. Veuer's Elizabeth Keatinge (@elizkeatinge) has more. Buzz60
CONNECTTWEET 454 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2Ag9q4o
