A message to Venezuela President Maduro: Release Joshua Holt
CLOSE

 Josh and Thamara Holt deserve to live as free citizens — not as bargaining chips in a game of global politics. 
Josh and Thamara Holt deserve to live as free citizens — not as bargaining chips in a game of global politics.

CONNECTTWEET 3 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Right now, one of our own is suffering in a leaky prison cell in Latin America, cut off from family, friends and many of the people he loves the most. Joshua Holt, a constituent of mine and an upstanding American citizen, was arrested by Venezuelan authorities in June 2016 and jailed on false charges. His health is quickly failing, and he desperately needs our help. 
Josh’s story is the nightmare of any American traveling abroad. 
Josh first flew to Venezuela last year to marry his fiancée, Thamara Caleno Holt, a young Venezuelan woman whom he fell in love with after months of constant correspondence. Just days after their marriage, the newlyweds were detained on spurious charges — for allegedly possessing weapons and engaging in espionage. In clear violation of the Vienna Convention, Venezuelan authorities not only denied Josh medical attention but also barred access to U.S. Consular officials for the first several weeks of his incarceration.
For months, Josh’s case has languished in Venezuelan courts. And while Venezuelan authorities dither, Josh continues to suffer in prison, alone and afraid in an alien country. With his case scheduled to move to trial in January, government authorities have offered no clarification as to how long the trial will take, or if U.S. officials will even be able to help Josh in legal proceedings. The Venezuelan government has also refused to guarantee that Josh will receive much-needed medical attention, even as his health continues to deteriorate.
The tragedy is that Josh is completely innocent of the crimes for which he stands accused. I know Josh to be a good and honorable man with a pure heart. As a case in point, Josh served for two years as a Mormon missionary in Washington prior to his marriage. It was in this setting that he learned Spanish and developed a deep love for the Hispanic people, culture and customs. That he would ever inflict harm on anyone, let alone the good people of Venezuela, is unthinkable.
From the time of Josh’s arrest last year, I have done everything in my power to secure his freedom. I have enlisted help from the highest levels of government, including from secretary of State Rex Tillerson, who has encouraged our diplomats on the ground to stand firm in their negotiations with Venezuelan authorities. I even raised the issue of Josh’s captivity with President Trump, who not long after, enacted heavy sanctions on Venezuela and called on President Nicolas Maduro to set Josh free.
As a leader looking to do what is good and just, President Maduro has an opportunity to change his country’s course with the release of Josh and Thamy on humanitarian grounds. This action would be a historic step in opening the channels of communication between our two countries. With this gesture of goodwill, the governments of Venezuela and the United States could move forward together towards a better future.
The path to greater peace begins with simple steps, and I invite President Maduro to take the first step. Doing so would bring relief to the Holt family and usher in a new era of U.S.-Venezuela relations, initiating a conversation from which both nations could benefit.
POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media
Venezuela and the United States have significant policy differences, to be sure. But working out our disagreements should not require the life of an innocent American and his wife, who is herself a native of Venezuela. Josh and Thamy deserve to live as free citizens — not as bargaining chips in a game of global politics.
As the senior member and former chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, I recognize the importance of state sovereignty and of a fair judicial process. But I believe just as strongly in protecting human rights and upholding the principles of justice.
That’s why President Maduro should release Josh and Thamy Holt. He must honor human life and recognize longstanding international conventions.
I call on him to help us bring Josh home.
Orrin Hatch is the senior senator from Utah, and president pro tempore of the United States Senate. 
 To respond to a column, submit a comment to letters@usatoday.com.
CONNECTTWEET 3 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2CyVSCz
