USA TODAY NETWORK Hires Robin Amer to Launch Investigative Podcast Series
CONNECTTWEET 55 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Investigative journalist Robin Amer is joining USA TODAY NETWORK as a driving voice in its innovative podcasting lineup. The NETWORK will debut Amer’s longform podcast, The City, in 2018, expanding its portfolio of more than 60 podcasts covering topics from music and politics to sports and comedy.
 Furthering the company’s commitment to its local-to-national network, Amer’s inaugural podcast The City explores different American metropolises, using news stories as a vehicle to examine each city’s power structure, revealing how our communities really work behind the scenes. Amer will work with NETWORK journalists across America to explore how our cities live and thrive.
 “USA TODAY NETWORK’s hyperlocal reach and commitment to investigative journalism is the perfect home to produce and release The City,” said Amer. “It’s clear that there is an investment in podcasting as a news medium, and I’m excited to start working with local journalists at publications across the country. These writers are deeply rooted in their communities and have a strong grasp of the core issues and struggles America’s cities and citizens face.”
 “The resurgence of podcasting has opened up a new avenue for innovative storytelling,” says Maribel Perez Wadsworth, chief transformation officer, Gannett | USA TODAY NETWORK. “This addition combines our award-winning investigative journalism with exciting tune-in entertainment. And, The City is a great fit for our line-up as it will elevate those compelling stories from our local communities to our national platform, greatly amplifying their reach."
 Amer is an award-winning reporter with more than 10 years of professional experience in broadcast, print and digital media. Most recently, she held the position of deputy news editor at Chicago Reader. She has received two national awards from the Sidney Hillman Foundation and her contributions helped the podcast Gravy win the 2015 James Beard Award for best podcast. As an investigative reporting fellow for Northwestern’s Medill Watchdog, Amer also contributed to a year-long collaboration with The Chicago Tribune that was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize.
 Amer’s ground-breaking podcast, The City is coming to USA TODAY NETWORK as the winner of WNYC’s 2015 Podcast Accelerator competition.
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2tJh6pj
