Tom Thibodeau has 'no regret' before Tuesday's return to United Center
CLOSE

 USA TODAY Sports' Sam Amick gives us three of the biggest surprises thus far in the NBA season. USA TODAY Sports

For the first time since he was "dismissed" as head coach of the Chicago Bulls despite compiling a 255-139 record, leading the team to five straight postseason appearances and earning a Coach of the Year award, Tom Thibodeau will be back on the United Center floor.
Only this time, he'll be on the visitors' sideline.
But Thibodeau, now in his first year as both coach and president of basketball operations for the Minnesota Timberwolves, insists that, regardless of his oftentimes tumultuous tenure that ended unfavorably, he has no regrets about his time with the Bulls.
"When you look back, you can focus in on the 10 or 15% that didn't end up going the way that you would have liked. There were a lot of good times," Thibodeau told reporters Tuesday. "Overall, the organization treated me great. I have no regret. It was a great experience for me and I'm looking forward to this challenge."
The challenge: Thibodeau's young, 6-18 Timberwolves will go to battle with the 13-10 Bulls on Tuesday night (8 pm ET, ESPN) in what promises to be an emotion-filled atmosphere unlike your typical mid-December game.
Last SlideNext Slide
"I look back and I think about all the great experiences that we had, how hard that team played, how hard they worked, the type of people that they are," Thibodeau said. "We played New York, it was great to see (former Bulls center) Joakim (Noah), (former Bulls guard) Derrick (Rose), and of course coming here, and being with Jimmy (Butler) this summer (with USA Basketball). They're great guys."
In addition to Butler, the only players left in Chicago from the Thibodeau era are Taj Gibson, Nikola Mirotic and Doug McDermott.
"It's going to be weird," Gibson told Chicago Tribune. "I'm so used to hearing him just yell my name out so frequently, 'Taj! Taj!' I'm used to (coach) Fred (Hoiberg's) voice now. But when I hear that (Thibodeau) bark, I may glance back.
"It's kind of a nerve-wracking feeling because you know that guy knows everything about you. He knows all your moves. It's going to be a good prep."
Follow AJ Neuharth-Keusch on Twitter @tweetAJNK
