Fresh Mix Friday: The perfect college graduation playlist
All the feels. (Rawpixel/iStock/Getty Images)
College graduation. 
On one hand, it thrusts you into the abyss of “adulthood”: Taxes, mortgages, jobs and no more dining dollars. What’s a freshly minted grown-up to do? It’s a deeply existential time.
But graduation also brings with it hope, optimism, the thrill of endless possibilities and complete freedom. You’ve got the universe at your fingertips. And though that’s totally scary, it’s also kinda cool.
So to send you off on your journey, here’s a list of the mushiest, most fun graduation songs. Hats off to you, Class of 2017.
1. Graduation (Friends Forever) – Vitamin C
The ultimate. Sampling Pachelbel’s Canon in D, probably the most-used graduation/wedding song ever, Vitamin C’s loopy 2000 anthem is pure sugar. Breezy, easy to sing along to, and you probably heard it at your eighth grade graduation, too.
2. Everybody’s Free (To Wear Sunscreen) – Baz Luhrman
Moulin Rouge director Baz Luhrmann was so inspired by a recording of writer Mary Schmich’s graduation speech that he set it to music. The result? A hypnotic, powerful ode to youth and the preservation of it.
3. Good Riddance (Time of Your Life) – Green Day
Green Day’s famous graduation song was actually written as a sarcastic break-up song. But the lyrics were so applicable, it’s essential listening for any graduation.
4. Unwritten – Natasha Bedingfield
“Drench yourself in words unspoken / Life your life with arms wide open / Today is where your book begins.” The rest is still unwritten. Listen to Natasha, grads. Write it.
5. 100 Years – Five for Fighting
The most #emo of graduation songs, Five for Fighting’s falsetto masterpiece is a trip through time that makes you realize just how quickly life goes by (and how we should cherish it). See? #EMO.
6. Heroes – David Bowie
Bowie’s 1977 glam rock anthem experienced a second wind recently thanks to The Perks of Being a Wallflower. It still stands strong as a rock ‘n’ roll reminder of life’s limitless possibilities.
7. All My Friends – LCD Soundsystem
LCD Soundsystem makes everyone emotional. Lead singer James Murphy’s lyrics hit you right in the heart — and All My Friends is one of those glittery, build-up songs that make you exciting to live life.
8. My Last Semester – The Wonder Years
The chorus rings: “I’m not sad anymore, I’m just tired of this place.” You understand us, The Wonder Years. It’s time to go off into the world outside dorm buildings and student IDs.
9. I Can – Nas
Nas’s inspirational, motivational hip-hop jam has a mantra that’s impossible to get out of your head: “I know I can be what I wanna be. If I work hard at it, I’ll be where I wanna be.” Keep repeating it to yourself under your breath.
10. I’ve Got A Feeling – The Beatles
Off the band’s farewell album, Let It Be, this Beatles song is their peaceful parting with the world as they knew it. It’s in the chords; it’s in the words. John Lennon happily sings, “Everybody had a good year, everybody had a good time,” as Paul McCartney sounds off the chorus: “I’ve got a feeling, a feeling deep inside, oh yeah.” We know you all have that feeling, grads. So run with it.
Melina Glusac is a member of the USA TODAY College contributor network.
This article comes from The USA TODAY College Contributor network. The views expressed in this article do not necessarily reflect the views of USA TODAY.
