Yelp users throw Trump’s words at him: Vulgar term pops up in property reviews
12 Shares 





One consequence of President Trump's reported use of the word "shithole"?
People are now using it to describe his properties.
Yelp reviewers have taken to the platform to rate the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C. and other Trump properties with a single star and some choice descriptions.
"What a shithole," Jamie M. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., wrote about the D.C. location. "There's not much else to say. At least it's a bit above sea level, so when the Chinese make our oceans rise I'll be able to stay dry."
Ashley M. of San Francisco poked at Trump's reported desire that he wants people from Norway to immigrate here, as opposed to people from "shithole countries."
"Perhaps the Trump brand could take some lessons from Norway, where they have the BEST hotels," she wrote. "Like, genius, hotels. Not shitholes like this."
Protesters also targeted the D.C. location over the weekend, when they projected the word onto the building.
The result of all these negative reviews? Trump International Hotel has dipped to two stars on the platform.
Other Trump properties haven't been immune to the low ratings or harsh descriptors, either. Trump Tower in New York has 2 stars, while Mar-a-Lago, Trump's private club in Palm Beach that he often visits, has 1.5 stars.
"Each time I have been here I have had A SHITHOLE experience," Catte A. of Los Angeles wrote of the Florida club. "Why anyone would want to belong to a SHITHOLE club like this boggles the mind."
Yelp has taken notice of the negative reviews on the Trump property pages.
"This business is being monitored by Yelp's Support team for content related to media reports," the pages for multiple Trump properties read.
But if you want to read the reviews, best get to them now. A number of the review pages, including for the Trump Grande condo building in Miami, noted that the negative comments could be taken down soon.
"While we don’t take a stand one way or the other when it comes to these news events, we do work to remove both positive and negative posts that appear to be motivated more by the news coverage itself than the reviewer’s personal consumer experience with the business," Yelp wrote on the condo building's page.
Still, not all the Trump properties' ratings have plummeted over the negative reviews (though their pages are still actively being monitored by Yelp). The Trump International Hotel Waikiki in Honolulu has 4 stars, while the Trump Winery in Charlottesville, Va., the Trump SoHo in New York, the Trump International Hotel in Las Vegas and the Trump International Hotel in Chicago each have 3.5 stars.




Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2Djg0ZN
