Do police have too much power? Your Say
Readers talk Trump, their interactions with local police.

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 1 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Letters to the editor: 
I’m a white, 71-year-old male with no criminal record — unless you count a couple of speeding tickets. I have interacted with police on and off over a 30-year professional career in municipal government and I feel they have far too much power. Anyone who doubts that should consider what the wrong person with a gun, badge and benefit-of-the-doubt could perpetrate. They are protected by powerful unions that will fight to keep even bad apples on the job. Labor relations departments strive to protect municipalities from expensive lawsuits generated by those bad apples. Oversight is fought as soon as it rears its head. Officers are not drafted into service, they apply for their jobs and they have the ability to leave at their discretion if they don’t care for the work conditions.
Edward Lumas; Grand Rapids, Mich.
I have never had a problem with law enforcement. That is not to say that I haven't been stopped or questioned by the police. I have answered all their questions and treated them with respect when they asked me anything. They have always treated me with respect as long as I was respectful. The ones who have problems with police are the ones who question or do not comply with the police when questioned or told what to do by a cop.
Jerry Gardner; Tyler, Texas
Related content: 
Our followers shared their thoughts on what policing will look like in Trump's America. Facebook comments and tweets are edited for clarity and grammar: 
This is pretty simple. Law breakers will go to jail, instead of being able to riot and burn their cities down because the current president has made our law enforcement officers afraid to do their job. The good guys will be good guys again, and the thugs will go to jail.
— Steve Barrett
Some cops are just trash and criminals with a badge. But the vast majority of them are hard working men and woman just like everyone else.
— Brian Kelly
People are already passing judgement on President-elect Donald Trump and complaining about current conditions, while giving President Obama a pass. They're putting all the blame on police and Trump.
— Jeff Felix
Elections matter. Liberals drove the car in the ditch. We have the keys. We're driving now. Liberals can come along for the ride but they'll have to sit in back.
— Arlie Hahn
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 1 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2iq3BYP
