Will Cameron's British surge come to the USA? Column
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this story did not have final information on the seats won in the British election and misstated the number of parliamentary seats in Scotland. The UK Independence Party won one seat. There are 59 Scottish seats in parliament.
At 10 pm British Daylight time on Thursday, at the last toll of the bell of Big Ben, BBC anchor David Dimbleby opened an envelope and told an astonished Britain that on the basis of exit polls David Cameron would be returned to office as its next Prime Minister with an even stronger showing than he had in his first term.
For hours, until actual returns confirmed his victory, even the most astute commentators refused to believe the exit polling. Even Lord Ashdown, chair of the Liberal Democrats who suffered a substantial drubbing, offered to "publicly eat my hat" if the poll was confirmed. The only question Friday morning is how he'd like it seasoned.
So today, the road is clear for Britain's exit from the European Union — Cameron, affirming that he'd hold a nationwide referendum, and the pound sterling surged against the Euro. After Cameron's all be unpredicted and overwhelming victory in national elections, he will now be able to rule all but unchallenged without even the need for a coalition with other parties, most of which suffered unpredicted and enormous defeats.
But the vote should hardly have come as en enormous surprise — it's simply part of a massive shift to the right across the English Channel in the rest of Europe. The only question remains whether this shift will also carry across the Atlantic in November 2016. And if that's the case, how will a new Republican president in America get on with an avowedly conservative British Prime Minister who Barack Obama calls "bro."
Cameron won his vote on the strength of a simple concept — Britain's on the way to recovery, still on life support in the rest of Europe. So do you really want to rock the boat by changing captains in mid-stream?
The Brits bought that and voted overwhelmingly for Cameron's Conservative Party. Of course, Cameron's party is really conservative in name only. To find those who, in American terms, might be more of the Tea Party stripe, it's necessary to move further right to the UK Independence Party. While it took only one seat in the 650-member Parliament, it surged into third place with 12.6% of the vote among more than 26 parties contesting the election — ahead even of the veteran center-left mainstay, the Liberal Democrats. 
At the same time, although the Scottish National Party took 56 of 59 seats in Scotland, Cameron continued to refuse any thought of the Scots leaving the United Kingdom.
But the biggest collapse was the Liberal Democrats — successors to the party of such great British leaders of the past as William Gladstone, Herbert Asquith and David Lloyd George.
"Not since the fall of (Margaret) Thatcher or the (Tony) Blair landslide has there been a political moment quite like this one," BBC analyst Nick Robinson observed, adding that the vote "will not just reshape British politics but could perhaps reshape the future of the United Kingdom itself."
Indeed, the leaders of all three of the losing major parties resigned—Labour's Ed Milliband, Liberal Democrat's Nick Clegg, even UKIP's Nigel Farage, who failed to win a seat himself in Parliament.
The key question that remains is how Britain will deal with the rest of Europe and especially the United States, not to mention a host of foreign policy and internal security issues that have swirled around David Cameron in the weeks leading up to Thursday's vote.
A recent poll by Chatham House, the Royal Institute for International Affairs, showed that 63% of the British public believed Britain should "aspire to be a 'great power,' rather than accept that it is in decline," the highest percentage the poll has ever registered. Still, the same poll showed only 17% believed Britain has the "responsibility to support popular uprisings against dictators."
Such sentiments are clearly reflected in Cameron's alignment with Obama administration initiatives in such key areas as Ukraine, Afghanistan and especially the war against ISIS. Indeed, last September, a Parliament where Cameron had a less robust plurality voted to begin Royal Air Force strikes against ISIS. The British public was especially horrified when it was revealed a Brit was the executioner of a number of western hostages decapitated on video. Cameron's tough-minded response certainly played a role in his election triumph Thursday.
But an eventual British departure from the European Union could prove to be the most seismic result of Thursday's vote. Indeed no member of the E.U. has departed since a united Europe, now comprising 28 nations with a single market, passport and tariff system, stretching from the UK to Baltic was launched in 1993. Britain has never joined the narrower European Monetary Union, electing to preserve the pound sterling as a separate currency, so in that sense its departure would be less catastrophic to the economies of the remaining nations. 
Still a Europe without Britain would then raise the specter of a Europe without Greece, or more critically Germany, France or a host of other nations where the newly resurgent political right is showing the same muscular intensity as David Cameron and his conservatives showed on Thursday.
David A. Andelman, a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors, is editor and publisher of World Policy Journal and author of A Shattered Peace: Versailles 1919 and the Price We Pay Today.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1H8TH53
