USA TODAY Sports all-bowl team is headlined by Alabama quarterback Tua Tagovailoa
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: Amidst the confetti, Trysta Krick and George Schroeder break down Alabama's thrilling OT win. USA TODAY Sports

College football’s lengthy postseason began with Troy defeating North Texas in the New Orleans Bowl and ended with Alabama edging past Georgia in Monday night’s national championship game.
Despite not entering the game until the third quarter, Alabama quarterback Tua Tagovailoa lands at quarterback on the USA TODAY Sports all-bowl team for 2017-18. He’s joined by a number of players from the matchup between Alabama and Georgia, along with postseason standouts representing teams from each Football Bowl Subdivision conference.
OFFENSE
QB: Tua Tagovailoa, Alabama
He led the Tide to 20 points in the second half to force overtime and then threw a game-winning touchdown pass from 41 yards out to lift Alabama to its fifth national championship in nine seasons.
RB: Sony Michel, Georgia
Michel torched Oklahoma with 222 yards of total offense and four scores in Georgia’s Rose Bowl win, and added 98 rushing yards in the loss to Alabama.
RB: Rashaad Penny, San Diego State
The Aztecs’ senior star posted the bowl season’s best single-game rushing performance with 221 yards and four scores on 15.8 yards per carry in a 42-35 loss to Army.
WR: Gregory Phillips, Purdue
After entering the postseason with 30 catches on the year and two receiving touchdowns for his career, the senior paced the nation with 14 receptions and doubled his career total with a pair of scores in the Boilermakers’ Foster Farms Bowl win against Arizona.
WR: Cedrick Wilson, Boise State
Boise’s latest win against Oregon, a 38-28 decision in the Las Vegas Bowl, was keyed by Wilson’s 10 receptions for 221 yards and a score.

TE: Tommy Sweeney, Boston College
Sweeney’s 137 receiving yards on seven grabs was highlighted by a career-long 48-yard catch, though his performance wasn’t enough to fend off a loss to Iowa in the Pinstripe Bowl.
OL: Ryan Bates, Penn State
Penn State’s offensive line was so dominant against Washington’s gifted front seven that any one of the starting five could draw accolades, but Bates gets the nod for bouncing back from a late-season injury and excelling at right tackle.
OL: David Forney, Navy
Forney and his compatriots on Navy’s offensive line bulldozed poor and pitiful Virginia to the tune of 452 rushing yards in a 49-7 Military Bowl win.
OL: Bradley Bozeman, Alabama
The man in the middle of Alabama’s offensive front was a stabilizing force as the Tide’s offense first struggled and then turned the reins over to Tagovailoa. (For good measure, Bozeman proposed to his fiancé after the win against Georgia.)
OL: Quenton Nelson, Notre Dame
One of the dominant players in college football and an elite NFL talent, Nelson provided one last series of highlights in Notre Dame’s win against LSU.
OL: Jake Brown, Central Florida
The sophomore earned the highest grade of any UCF offensive lineman after the Knights’ front more than held its own in the Peach Bowl matchup against Auburn’s defense.
DEFENSE
DL: Da’Ron Payne, Alabama
First he had an interception against Clemson, then he grabbed a receiving touchdown against the Tigers, and then he pushed around linemen and collapsed pockets in helping Alabama’s defense stand tall in the second half against Georgia.

DL: Jonathan Ledbetter, Georgia
The Bulldogs’ standout end accounted for a combined nine tackles, two tackles for loss and 1.5 sacks across games against Oklahoma and the Crimson Tide.
DL: Carl Granderson, Wyoming
Granderson’s five tackles and a sack would’ve been good enough on their own, but his 58-yard fumble return for a touchdown was the highlight of Wyoming’s 37-14 win against Central Michigan in the Idaho Potato Bowl.
DL: Sam Hubbard, Ohio State
With 2.5 sacks and 3.5 tackles for loss, Hubbard was the leader of a pass rush that accounted for eight sacks and owned the line of scrimmage in the Buckeyes’ impressive Cotton Bowl manhandling of Southern California.
LB: Leighton Vander Esch, Boise State
Vander Esch gets the nod by a hair ahead of Alabama’s Rashaan Evans and Georgia’s Roquan Smith by filling the box score against Oregon – with 12 tackles, a sack and a forced fumble – in his final college game.
LB: Te’Von Coney, Notre Dame
Coney was here, there and everywhere in the Irish’s narrow win against LSU, making 17 total stops to lead all defenders this postseason.
LB: Shaquem Griffin, Central Florida
Griffin showed why he’s one of the premier players in college football – if somewhat overlooked during award season – by making 12 tackles, 3.5 tackles for loss and 1.5 sacks against Auburn.

DB: Amani Hooker, Iowa
Among Hooker’s team-best 12 tackles against Boston College were two that kept the Eagles out of the end zone and proved the difference in a 27-20 win.
DB: Chris Lammons, South Carolina
Lammons led the Gamecocks with three passes defended as part of a secondary that held Michigan to 21 completions in 45 attempts for 203 yards.
DB: Mark McLaurin, Mississippi State
McLaurin was named the MVP of the TaxSlayer Bowl after intercepting Louisville quarterback Lamar Jackson three times, the most by any player during bowl play.
DB: Damon Webb, Ohio State
Webb made a splash against Southern California with a handful of game-changing plays, including a recovered fumble and a 23-yard interception returned for a touchdown.
SPECIAL TEAMS
K: Rodrigo Blankenship, Georgia
Blankenship made five of his six field-goal attempts during Georgia’s two postseason games, with a make of 50-plus yards against both Oklahoma and Alabama.
P: Michael Dickson, Texas
To control the game from the punter spot, as he did in the Longhorns’ bowl win against Missouri, was a fitting way for Dickson’s college career to come to an end.
RET: Jason Huntley, New Mexico State
Huntley’s 100-yard kickoff return in the first quarter helped New Mexico State top Utah State in the Arizona Bowl in the program’s first postseason appearance in 57 years.
IMAGES FROM THE COLLEGE FOOTBALL BOWL SEASON

 Alabama defensive lineman Da'Ron Payne, left, and quarterback Jalen Hurts hold the 2018 Sugar Bowl trophy after beating Clemson in the College Football Playoff semifinal. Chuck Cook, USA TODAY Sports
