USA TODAY NETWORK Releases New Designs to Visually Unite Products
CONNECTTWEET 6 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
USA TODAY NETWORK announced a network-wide brand refresh today, aimed to create a strong visual connection among the network’s many media organizations by refreshing the look of both print and digital products.
Since USA TODAY NETWORK’s launch in December 2015, the brand has served both local and national audiences in innovative ways and connected local brands through unique content and experiences. This effort visually connects all local news brands and highlights Gannett’s local-to-national footprint.
The refresh spans the scope of the entire network reaching more than 100 local properties and as well as USA TODAY. Highlights of the refresh include a new typeface for all print and digital properties, a feature that enhances readability, color vibrancy, and bolder copy. All print editions have been unified by a new four-column grid structure in their layouts, and 30 local digital properties have new master brand logos that feature the core blue color and point of USA TODAY NETWORK.
With its unique local-to-national approach to storytelling, the network provides groundbreaking reporting that makes an impact nationwide. Most recently, the NETWORK has utilized its unique approach with special projects including The Wall, a multi-media report on the proposed border wall between the U.S. and Mexico. The Network provided in-depth report from over 30 journalists, including a 13-part documentary series with interactive video, photo, and VR elements. Beyond traditional storytelling, the network connects readers in innovative ways by bringing communities together for live storytelling opportunities and various events including Taco Festival, a Food & Wine series, and Sports Awards to name a few.
“Since launching the USA TODAY NETWORK in 2015, we have brought together our brands in innovative ways with a unique local-to-national approach to news and storytelling and through our unified operations. Today, we are furthering our commitment by bringing the network together visually to showcase our reach to our readers, advertisers, and partners,” said Andy Yost, Chief Marketing Officer, USA TODAY NETWORK and Gannett.
The brand refresh was led internally by Matthew Urbanos, VP of Brand Marketing, and his team of creative designers and illustrators. For more information on the brand refresh, click here.
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2iMpoMM
