Brand Guidelines
Why do I need permission to use the USA TODAY logo?
To ensure that the USA TODAY logo is used consistently and correctly.
USA TODAY Brand Marketing must approve all collateral (print, electronic and broadcast).
If you’d like to use a USA TODAY logo on your website, in an advertisement, in an article or book, or any other reproduction, you must first receive permission from USA TODAY.
Use only USA TODAY approved artwork when using USA TODAY logos.
The USA TODAY logo must include the registered trademark.
The USA TODAY logo may appear in black & white or a CMYK build of cyan_100%, magenta_6%, yellow_0%, and black_0%.
For all applications (print, web, etc) please complete the permission request form and email it to brand@usatoday.com.
When USA TODAY is mentioned in text:
The logo should not appear in body copy. Instead, typeset USA TODAY in the same typeface used in the text and in all caps.
USA TODAY must appear on the same line, do not break between lines of text.
When referring to the newspaper, state as USA TODAY, two words, all caps. Never use USAT, USA Today and avoid breaking from line to line. Refer to USA TODAY as the ‘newspaper’ but never the ‘paper.’
The names of the newspaper sections (News, Money, Sports and Life) are written with initial caps and always appear in this order: News, Money, Sports and Life.
When referring to the website, state as USATODAY.com, one word, all caps except for the dot-com (which is lower case). When referring to any USATODAY.com URL, state as usatoday.com, all lower case. (Do not capitalize the first letter of usatoday.com if it begins a sentence.)
When referring to USA TODAY and USATODAY.com, refer to the USA TODAY brand.
Don’t display or use a USA TODAY logo in any manner that implies a relationship or affiliation with, sponsorship, or endorsement by USA TODAY or that it can be reasonably interpreted to suggest editorial content has been authored by, or represents the views or opinions of USA TODAY.
The newspaper deals directly and individually with its advertisers and does not accept brokered advertising.
The standards and preferred colors for the USA TODAY logo are as follows:
4C on white.
Black on white.
White reversed out of a solid color.
The 4C USA TODAY master logo is the preferred logo to use.
Provide as much clear space as possible around the logo. The minimum clear space required around the logo must equal 1x the cap height of the ‘U’ in USA TODAY.
USA TODAY logo size and placement:
The minimum USA TODAY Master logo width is 2.53 inches wide.
If the USA TODAY logo is shown with three or more logos, it should be placed in the best position possible.
