In critical Missouri Senate race, Blunt says Supreme Court is key
NEOSHO, Mo. — Sen. Roy Blunt told voters across southwest Missouri on Saturday that he is the only thing standing between Hillary Clinton and a vastly reshaped Supreme Court.
“If I don’t get elected, (Republicans) will not be in the majority,” Blunt told a crowd of about 200 people in Neosho, where GOP party faithful gathered for the Annual Free Bean Feed.
“This is about the Supreme Court,” Blunt said as the group feasted on chili and ice cream. “This is about the 51st vote in the Senate.”
He’s right. Missouri has become ground zero for control of the U.S. Senate — home to one of the most competitive contests in the country, and one of the most surprising.
Just hours before Blunt took the microphone in Neosho, his rival, Democrat Jason Kander, made his own swing through this conservative corner of the state. Kander did not talk about the national implications on Tuesday’s election, focusing instead on his change message and a promise to shake things up in Washington.
“I’m going there to replace Roy Blunt, but I’ll never become Roy Blunt,” Kander said to cheers from the crowd of 150 Democratic activists before they began a final get-out-the-vote canvassing campaign.
Kander has rocketed into the national spotlight with his come-from-behind campaign, powered by his compelling biography and the electorate’s anti-incumbent anger. He has highlighted his military service in Afghanistan and hammered Blunt’s family ties to lobbyists, including his wife and son.
Until early September, every public poll showed Blunt ahead, but the race has now tightened to a dead heat.
So it’s no wonder that both Blunt and Kander packed the final 72 hours of the campaign with last-minute rallies and rev-ups in the hopes of turning out every last voter on Tuesday.
“We feel all the momentum in this race,” said Kander. “It’s unmistakable.”
Blunt dismissed that notion and suggested he would finish well ahead of Kander on Tuesday night.
“We are much stronger on the ground than they are,” he said.

In his closing argument, Blunt touted his staunch opposition to President Obama’s agenda — from the health care reform law to environmental regulations. But his crescendo came when he turned to the Supreme Court.
In a stop at the Greene County GOP headquarters on Saturday, the Republican senator ticked through a list of narrowly decided Supreme Court cases on gun rights, abortion and the president’s executive powers. And he speculated the next president could appoint as many as four new justices, although there is only one vacancy right now.
“We’re deciding what happens for a generation,” Blunt told the 50 volunteers, who were taking a pizza-and-pep-talk break from phone banking.
That message was enough to motivate Marc Cerce, a minister from Battlefield. “Everything I stand for will be threatened if the Supreme Court changes,” Cerce said. “There is a full frontal attack on Christian liberties.
Even as Cerce and others said they believed Blunt would pull out a victory, they were cautious about making any firm predictions.
“It’s close, that’s all I’m saying,” said Danette Proctor, the county’s GOP chairwoman. “We are working very hard in the 7th congressional district to get Roy over the hump.”
 An hour later in a Teamster’s hall, Kander’s closing pitch showed the contrast. There was no talk about the Supreme Court or dicey social issues like abortion and guns.
Instead, he urged supporters to tell neighbors and friends about his promises to ease student debt and fight for equal pay for women. And where Blunt was somber and methodical, Kander was light and animated.
“This is where we sprint,” Kander told the crowd in Springfield. “This is where we get it done.”

Kander’s supporters were bullish about his prospects, even as they acknowledged his uphill climb.
“He’s going to pull it off,” said Brad Keen, a Lebanon Democrat who works at Hiland Dairy Foods. “People are tired of Blunt.”
Both Blunt and Kander will be zig-zagging across the state before Missourians head to the polls.
Kander is scheduled to hold get-out-the-vote rallies in Kirksville, Hannibal and St. Louis before heading to Kansas City for election night. Blunt will join other statewide Republican candidates on a six-city fly-around that starts in St. Louis and ends in Springfield, where he plans to be when the returns come in.
“Nobody on Wednesday will be sorry they worked too hard,” Blunt said.

 Democratic Senate candidate Katie McGinty, and Republican Sen. Pat Toomey prepare for their debate in Pittsburgh on Oct. 17, 2016. Jared Wickerham, AP
