Ready? Here's your final eclipse checklist
In case you haven't heard, a certain mega-event is happening Monday: the total solar eclipse of the sun, the first time we've seen such a natural wonder in the United States, from coast to coast, since 1918. 
The Talking Tech newsletter is here as your last-minute guide to all things eclipse. Where to view it online and on TV, where to still buy your solar glasses, how to photograph it and what to do about a weak connection when surrounded by mobs of people all trying to get on the network at the same time. 
—Is it too late to buy glasses? You will need the solar glasses, which were selling for $2 to $3 a few weeks ago, to look up at the sun during the eclipse, or else risk potential blindness. Sadly, Amazon looks to be as good as almost sold out, though there are some pairs offered at sky-high jacked up +$100 prices. You can also try eBay, craigslist, or retailers like 7-Eleven, Circle K, Lowe's, Toys "R" Us and Walmart. If they're sold out, try finding some No. 14 welder's glass goggles at the hardware store. 
—Where to view the eclipse? Beyond seeing the total solar eclipse in key locations like Oregon and South Carolina, there is limited TV coverage on CNN, the Science Channel Weather Channel and NASA TV, and heavy online showcasing. The USA TODAY Network will begin live streaming Monday at 9 a.m. PT from Newport, Oregon and on Instagram Live at 10:10 a.m. PT and expanding to key locations in the path of totality. 
—How to photograph. NASA suggests nabbing a solar filter gell to tape over the lens of a DSLR to protect the image sensor if you're looking to grab a close-up shot of the sun and the moon during the big moment. But solar gells are also hard to still find. Thousand Oaks Optical is the main brand offering the sheet, which you cut up and tape over the lens when the sun is blazing right before totality. Amazon had sheets for $10-$20 a few weeks ago, now the ones still in stock are selling for $175 and up, and who knows if they will be delivered on time before the 21st. Your local camera store might have a sheet available, but the two largest online camera vendors, B&H and Adorama, say they are sold out. 
Most folks will take photos on the smartphone or GoPro, and both Apple and GoPro say no solar filter is needed for the mobile devices, since they offer a wide angle view, and the sun will be a fraction of the image. The same goes for one of these extreme wide-angle 360 degree virtual reality cameras like the Samsung Gear 360 or Ricoh Theta, where the sun will be a minor character in a wild, super wide shot. 
—How to do time-lapses. One great way to enjoy the solar eclipse with your full-attention and capture it for memories is to shoot a time-lapse video. This way, you mount your camera, smartphone or GoPro on a tripod, click record ten minutes before totality starts, and just let it go. Afterwards, you stop recording, and view your shot of the world flying by at super fast speeds, which you can adjust in a video editor. Conversely, you could just make a regular video and speed it up, but time-lapses often look more surreal and cooler. Check out my guide on how to shoot time-lapses on mobile devices. 
—Looking to enjoy the eclipse? There's an app for that—over 100 of them! Most aren't worth your time, but there a few stand-outs, most notably the Smithsonian app and Eclipse Safari. They tell you when exactly you'll be able to see the eclipse in your area, how long it will last and what the weather will look like. 
—What about a connection? Now comes to the hardest part of the day. You get tens of thousands of people gathered en masse, all wanting to shoot their eclipse selfies or live-streams at the same time, and there is serious network overload. The wireless carriers say they've upgraded in key areas along the path of totality, but don't hold your breath. The networks usually can't handle this much traffic on one spot. We do have some tips for how to make it through. 
Meanwhile, in other tech news this week: 
—Another massive TV shakeup, per Netflix. Mega-producer Shonda Rhimes, who is responsible for ABC's entire Thursday lineup ("Grey's Anatomy," "Scandal" and "How to Get away with Murder") said she would dump ABC/Disney for a new home producing at Netflix. You'll recall that last week Netflix shares were down when Disney said it would remove its entertainment from Netflix, and start two new streaming services, for entertainment and ESPN Sports. 
The move is big because it changes the power structure in Hollywood, where writer/producers of TV shows are the biggest stars because they churn out the hits and keep them running for years. If they move en masse to streaming, what will happen to network TV? 
—Paying friends with your phone. The Venmo app has been a campus staple for years, for friends to chip in with their share of the pizza money. Mobile peer payments are coming to iPhones in the fall. Our Brett Molina has a guide to Venmo and other payment apps here. 
—Hello Google, call dad! Google Home, the Internet giant's answer to Amazon's Echo connected speaker, introduced free phone calling from the device this week. Note that instead of the "OK Google," command that is used to pose queries to Home, to make a call, you say, "Hello Google."
—Many of the websites and services associated with the controversial and deadly Charlottesville, Va. protest by hate groups saw their online presence yanked by Apple, Google, GoDaddy, Spotify, Facebook, Twitter and others. Websites affected include the Daily Stormer and Facebook pages belonging to White Nationalists United, Right Wing Death Squad and Vanguard America.
Our Week in Audio
—Leaving the iPhone by the cheese. We talk to consumers about the oddest places they've misplaced their phones. 
—Apps for the eclipse. Our opinionated guide to all those eclipse apps. 
—Changes coming to the Apple Watch. We fill you in on how the next edition of the smartwatch could be un-tethered from the iPhone. 
—Everything you wanted to know about the total solar eclipse. We sit down with USA TODAY's ace weather reporter Doyle Rice to answer all the big questions. 
Finally, if you haven't subscribed to the newsletter yet, what are you waiting for? Just click this link and sign up: usat.ly/2qaIVVQ. We also invite you to subscribe to the #TalkingTech podcast on Apple Podcasts, Stitcher, Tunein and wherever else you like to hear great online audio. And please follow me on Twitter and on Facebook. 
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2x0PLR0
