Tennys Sandgren appeared to not know Twitter was public and that's a bad excuse
shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 24, 2018 1:24 pm  Follow @ninamandell  
Tennys Sandgren devoted his life to becoming a highly-ranked professional tennis player and surely must have understood that succeeding (which he did by getting to the Australian Open quarterfinals) would make him famous. Which means that in addition to collecting big checks for playing tennis, he would be asked by fans for an autograph. They would perhaps even follow him on social media. Reporters, looking to keep up with his daily life, would also follow him there.
Tennys Sandgren does, in fact, have a Twitter account. On it, he liked and favorited and tweeted about things like his belief in Pizzagate and support of the Alt-Right and more (those tweets have since been deleted). Yet he’s now trying to act — despite his Twitter account being public and having his name on it — as if he can’t understand why people are taking this so seriously. “I’m more than happy to talk with people and let people know how I feel about things,” he said during an ESPN interview aired Tuesday while complaining about the attention over his Twitter account, which is a place where people like Sandgren generally make it known how they feel about things.
 Dude is running Kyrgios off the court. He also tweets a lot pic.twitter.com/ObCR8BbQOE
 — Dan Steinberg (@dcsportsbog) August 3, 2017
Maybe he thought it was just his personal diary?
Anyway, reporters, of course, began asking about his questionable social media use as he progressed in the tournament. Tuesday, after losing to Hyeon Chung, Sandgren blasted the media for doing something as audacious as checking his Twitter account — which again, was public — and tried to deflect the journalists in the room toward blindly asking about his quarterfinal tennis match at the Australian Open. His opening statement:
“You seek to put people in these little boxes so that you can order the world in your already assumed preconceived ideas. You strip away any individuality for the sake of demonizing by way of the collective.
“With a handful of follows and some likes on Twitter, my fate has been sealed in your minds. To write an edgy story, to create sensationalist coverage, there are a few lengths you wouldn’t go to mark me as the man you desperately want me to be.
“You would rather perpetuate propaganda machines instead of researching information from a host of angles and perspectives while being willing to learn, change, and grow. You dehumanize with pen and paper and turn neighbor against neighbor. In so doing, you may actually find you’re hastening the hell you wish to avoid, the hell we all wish to avoid.
“It is my firm belief that the highest value must be placed on the virtue of each individual, regardless of gender, race, religion or sexual orientation. It’s my job to continue on this journey with the goal of becoming the best me I can and to embody the love Christ has for me, for I answer to Him and Him alone.
“I’ll take questions about the match, if you guys don’t mind. Thank you. If you have any questions about the match.”
Look, we get it. Getting suddenly famous leaves anyone open to a wave of people digging into their lives, and it’s got to be a shock no matter how well you’ve prepared for it.
Wanting to know more about a person is human nature, though, and journalists therefore ask questions and dig around so they can paint a more complete picture of this interesting person who happens to be good at a sport. It’s not like Sandgren became famous in a few minutes because of one viral moment; he’s been building to this point for years.
Yet on ESPN Chris Fowler defended Sandgren, saying he was just caught up in the shock of instant celebrity.
“He gave a very thoughtful interview to Chris McKendry on our set, because, Patrick, when you start winning matches—instant celebrity means scrutiny of your social media, your beliefs, and getting questioned about that,” he argued.
But Sandgren dedicated his life to a sport that is popular across the globe. And he logged onto a readily available social media platform, built an audience (he has more than 10,000 followers) and had to expect — or even hope — that people would read his tweets if he found success on the court.
This isn’t a wildly unexpected thing: A man who plays professional tennis did well in said job, and now people want to know more about controversial thoughts he has already shared. His decision to blame people for asking questions about them shows as much depth as the whack theories that he appears to believe in.
