A horse's jockey falling off at the finish cost a bettor over $571,000
By December 29, 2017 11:26 am  Follow @bycharlescurtis  
 342 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | December 29, 2017 11:26 am  Follow @bycharlescurtis  
We hope whoever the bettor is who lost over $571,000 on this heartbreaker that the new year gives you better luck.
At Florida’s Gulfstream Park, a horse was thisclose to winning a race and giving a single gambler the chance at a massive payday.
But then … oh nooooooooooooooooooo.
Jockey Emisael Jaramillio was tossed from Cryognic just a few steps from the wire, which meant the thoroughbred was out of the running.
Before we get to that lost $571,000, Jaramillio was okay:
 According to his agent Bryce Soth jockey Emisael Jaramillo suffered no serious injuries from spill in Gulfstream Park finale and is expected to be released from hospital tomorrow and hoping to ride on Friday although that is still to be determined.
 — Mike Welsch (@DRFWelsch) December 29, 2017
And here’s the soul-crushing way the bettor lost. Via the Fresno Bee:
The Pick-6 requires a bettor to pick six winners in a row, usually the last six races of the day. Gulfstream is one of the tracks that has adopted a “rainbow” policy: If more than one bettor hits all six, the prize pool is shared evenly but with some held over for the next day. That pool of money continues to build, supplemented by new cash each day, and is paid out in full only if there is one unique ticket – the proverbial pot of gold at the end of the rainbow.
Even at the base price of 20 cents, it remains an exceptionally hard bet for any one person to hit just to gain a share. But given the number of bettors involved, and the elaborate combination of horses they play, the last race often arrives with no chance at the rainbow payoff. At the very least, it’s usually only one or two horses alive at huge odds to take down the whole pool.
But on Thursday, the rainbow was well within reach entering the 10th, the final race in the sequence. Somebody, somewhere, was alive to an 8-1 shot, Cryogenic, in the 1-mile turf race. The jackpot: $571,744.
That’s just brutal.
(Thanks to Deadspin for sharing.)
