5 things you need to know this weekend
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated the date Donald Trump will host 'Saturday Night Live.' He appears on Nov. 7.
1. NFL experiments with streaming a game from London
The NFL will experiment Sunday with streaming a game from London in hopes to grow revenue for their $10 billion a year business. The matchup between the Buffalo Bills and Jacksonville Jaguars will be available only through Yahoo outside of the teams' home cities in the U.S. and around the world. This is unwelcome news to some NFL fans with DirecTV. The 9:30 a.m. ET kickoff means the game takes place in the afternoon in Western Europe and will be at least partly in prime time in the emerging markets of Eastern Europe and Asia. This is where the NFL can still add huge numbers of fans and the profits that come with that. The NFL wants to figure out whether there's significant money to be made in distributing games "over the top" — streaming them directly to fans.Yahoo and other tech companies such as Google and Apple could be future partners in how the league broadcasts the sport, to go along with its traditional deals with the television networks.

x
Embed
x
CLOSE

VIDEO PLAYLIST: LATEST FROM THE NFL Brady, defense propel Patriots to yet another Super Bowl | 2:20
SportsPulse: USA TODAY Sports' Lindsay H. Jones and Jarrett Bell discuss how the New England Patriots were able to make another comeback and take down the Jacksonville Jaguars. USA TODAY Sports
1 of 3

x
CLOSE

VIDEO PLAYLIST: LATEST FROM THE NFL Why Raiders should be punished (if they broke Rooney Rule) | 2:10
SportsPulse: If the Raiders broke the Rooney rule - in their process of hiring Jon Gruden - the consequences should be stiff. USA TODAY Sports
2 of 3

VIDEO PLAYLIST: LATEST FROM THE NFL Jon Gruden returning to NFL with Raiders | 1:56
SportsPulse: NFL insider Lindsay H. Jones on how Jon Gruden's decision to return to the Oakland Raiders could reinvigorate the franchise and get Derek Carr back to MVP form. USA TODAY Sports
3 of 3
 Brady, defense propel Patriots to yet another Super Bowl 

 Why Raiders should be punished (if they broke Rooney Rule) 

 Jon Gruden returning to NFL with Raiders 
2. Kerry to meet with Palestinian leader Abbas 
Secretary of State John Kerry and Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas will meet this weekend in Jordan as Kerry presses his effort to curb an outbreak of violence in Israel and the Palestinian territories. Kerry met this week with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in Germany. Netanyahu blamed "incitement" by Hamas and Abbas for weeks of sometimes deadly attacks by Palestinians against Israelis. Ten Israelis and more than 40 Palestinians have died.

 Palestinian protesters throw stones at Israeli soldiers during clashes in the West Bank city of Hebron. Abed Al Hashlamoun, European Pressphoto Agency
 A Palestinian protester uses a slingshot during clashes with Israeli soldiers following a funeral of Ibrahim Skafi, 22, in the West Bank city of Hebron. Skafi rammed his vehicle into an Israeli police officer in the West Bank seriously injuring the officer before he was shot and killed, police said. Majdi Mohammed, AP
 Israeli paramedics and rescue workers treat a Palestinian man in Netanya, Israel. A Palestinian stabbed and wounded a 70-year-old man in northern Israel before being shot by officers, police said Monday, just hours after another Palestinian knifed several people, including an 80-year-old woman, in a stabbing spree near Tel Aviv. They were the latest attacks in more than a month of violence. Ariel Schalit, AP
 A Palestinian student from Birzeit University gets ready to hurl a stone toward Israeli troops during clashes at the northern entrance of the Palestinian town of Al-Bireh on the outskirts of Ramallah in the Israeli-occupied West Bank. Abbas Momani, AFP/Getty Images
 Palestinian protesters look around a wall during clashes in the West Bank city of Hebron. United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon says he understands Palestinian frustrations, but urges violence will not help achieve statehood. In a surprise emergency visit to the region, Ban urged Palestinians to stop knife attacks and violent protests, and Israel to stop security measures such as demolishing homes and erecting walls, acts that he warned would only add to Palestinian desperation and frustration. Abed Al Hashlamoun, European Pressphoto Agency
 Eritrean migrants women mourn during a memorial gathering for Habtom Zerhom, in Tel Aviv, Israel. Zarhum died of his wounds after an Israeli security guard fired at him and later was beaten by a mob that mistakenly believed he was a Palestinian attacker during a shooting in the southern city of Beersheba. Ariel Schalit, AP
 Palestinian Fatema Masalmeh, center, the wife of slain Udai Masalmeh, 24, mourns during his funeral at the family house in the West Bank village of Beit Awa, Hebron. Masalmeh was fatally shot near the village of Beit Awa after lightly injuring an Israeli army officer with a knife, according to a statement from the military. Nasser Nasser, AP
 Israeli police at the scene where a Palestinian man was shot dead by an Israeli soldier after he stabbed a young Jewish women between the Israeli Settelment of Adam north of Jerusalem and the West Bank city of Ramallah. Abir Sultan, european pressphoto agency
 A Palestinian swings a sling during clashes with Israeli troops, near Ramallah, West Bank. Secretary-General Ban Ki Moon called for calm during a surprise visit to Jerusalem ahead of meetings with Israeli and Palestinian leaders, in a high-profile gambit to bring an end to a month long wave of violence. Majdi Mohammed, AP
 Israelis carrying a wounded policeman injured during an attack allegedly carried out by Palestinian man, at the bus station in Beersheba, Israeli. A man opened fire in a southern Israel bus terminal, killing one before authorities shot him dead. Dudu Grunshpan, european pressphoto agency
 Israeli border police check a Palestinian driver on a road outside the Palestinian neighborhood of Jabal Mukaber in East Jerusalem. Israel began setting up checkpoints in Palestinian areas of annexed East Jerusalem as it struggled to stop a wave of attacks that have raised fears of a full-scale uprising. Menahem Kahana, AFP/Getty Images
 Masked Palestinians use binoculars to watch Israeli security forces during clashes near the Jewish settlement of Beit El, just north of the West Bank city of Ramallah. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said that Israel would use "all means" available to end Palestinian violence and that new security measures were planned. Abbas Momani, AFP/Getty Images
 A lawyer wearing his official robe kicks a tear gas canister back toward Israeli soldiers during a demonstration by scores of Palestinian lawyers called for by the Palestinian Bar Association in solidarity with protesters at the Al-Aqsa mosque compound in Jerusalem's Old City, near Ramallah, West Bank. Majdi Mohammed, AP
 Women cry during the funeral of Palestinian teenager Ahmad Sharaka, 13, who was killed by Israeli forces, at the family house in the Palestinian West Bank refugee camp of Jalazoun, Ramallah. Ramallah Government Hospital director Ahmed Bitawi said Ahmad Sharaka was shot dead by three live bullets to the head, neck and chest. The Israeli military had no immediate comment. Nasser Nasser, AP
 A masked Palestinian hurls rocks towards Israeli soldiers during clashes following the funeral of Mohammed Fares al-Jaabari on October 10, 2015, in the center of the West Bank town of Hebron. Israeli security forces have arrested approximately 400 Palestinians since the October 1 outbreak of violence. Hazem Bader, AFP/Getty Images
 Palestinian stone throwers clash with Israeli security forces near an Israeli checkpoint in the West Bank town of Hebron. Palestinian president Mahmud Abbas said he wanted to avoid a violent escalation with Israel, his most direct comments since unrest has spread and provoked fears of a new uprising. Hazem Bader, AFP/Getty Images
3. It's their (Democratic) party, and they'll vie if they want to
Democratic presidential candidates and some of their supporters will descend on Des Moines Saturday for the Iowa Democratic Party's annual Jefferson-Jackson dinner. The lovefest has historically kicked off the final push to caucus night, a little more than three months away. Former secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders and former Maryland governor Martin O'Malley will speak. (Lincoln Chafee and Jim Webb dropped from the race this week.) For Clinton, it should seem like an easy go compared with the Benghazi grilling she withstood this week.

 Hillary Clinton has plenty to say about the terrorist attacks on Benghazi, Libya, in 2012. But in front of the House Select Committee on Benghazi on Oct. 22., it seems her hands are doing the talking. Saul Loeb, AFP/Getty Images
 The hearing got heated between Democrats and Chairman Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., over whether to make public the full transcript of Sidney Blumenthal’s interview with investigators. It was the first time voices were raised during the first three hours of testimony. Saul Loeb, AFP/Getty Images
4. Live from New York, it's The Donald on 'SNL'
The Hair That Would be President takes New York by storm Saturday Nov. 7 when Donald Trump hosts Saturday Night Live. The show is actually Trump's second time as host — he hosted the NBC late-night institution in April 2004 when his NBC reality show, The Apprentice, was becoming a national phenomenon and "you're fired" marched in to the nation's lexicon.
CLOSE

 NBC announced Donald Trump will be the first 2016 presidential candidate to host the show this season. Video provided by Newsy Newslook
5. New York City's stately Gracie Mansion reopens to public
New York City's "Little White House" will reopen to the public Sunday. Gracie Mansion, the official residence of New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio, closed in January 2014 for repairs and asbestos abatement. Next week, the mayor will transform the mansion, built in 1799, into a haunted house for a two-day public Halloween party for children and their parents.
CLOSE

 Gracie Manor is the home of New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio. Ahead of its public reopening, USA TODAY got a peek inside at some of the newest artwork chosen with a focus on diversity. 
Bonus: This town is celebrating Christmas this weekend in honor of a terminally ill 7-year-old boy.
CLOSE

 An entire town in St. George, Ontario, is decking the halls early to lift the spirits of a terminally ill little boy. Leigh Scheps (@LeighTVReporter) has the story. Buzz60
The weekend essentials:
Giving those eyes of yours a weekend break? Listen to the top stories:
Need a break? Try playing some of our games.
You can subscribe to get the day's top news each weekday in your inbox, or find us on the Yo! app: justyo.co/usatoday.
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1LTFqKC
