Save America’s solar manufacturers
We're the the canary in the coal mine of China’s attack on our industries: Opposing view

American solar manufacturers have played by the rules but have come under relentless assault by China and its proxies. President Trump can save this industry and turn the tide against this strategic competitor’s assault on U.S. manufacturing. The president has until Jan. 26 to decide whether to impose strong tariffs and strict limits on imports of solar cells and modules.
Why does this matter?
America’s solar manufacturers are the canary in the coal mine of China’s attack on our industries. China’s “five-year plans” have overtly targeted our solar manufacturers. China covertly hacked and stole technology from U.S. companies, for which the Justice Department indicted members of its military. China’s government funds its factories, resulting in a flood of artificially cheap solar cells and modules, causing worldwide prices to plummet.
The results are catastrophic. About 30 American solar manufacturers have gone bankrupt, or suffered mass layoffs or crippling financial harm over the past five years. Thousands of jobs have been lost, and if the president does not act, then this industry and its research and development for the next generation of solar cells will die. Our country’s energy infrastructure and military bases will be wholly dependent on China for this energy source.
The International Trade Commission unanimously agreed that imports caused significant injury and recommended that Trump take action.
If the president’s actions are not strong enough, U.S. solar manufacturing will die and China will be incentivized to attack other technologically leading American industries. But if tariffs and quotas are strict enough, investment in solar manufacturing will return to the U.S. and create jobs — the same way President Reagan saved the U.S. semiconductor industry.
President Trump can stop this assault and level the playing field for this high-tech American manufacturing sector by saying enough is enough.
Matt Card is executive vice president of commercial operations at Suniva, one of two companies that brought the unfair-trade case.
If you can't see this reader poll, please refresh your page.
CONNECTTWEET 1 LINKEDIN 4 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2EMMKHW
