A NOTE FROM THE EDITOR: Network investigations spark action and legislative reform
A NOTE FROM THE EDITOR:
A momentous two weeks at the USA TODAY NETWORK. We have had several significant scoops that have prompted immediate action and legislative reform.
First, the Army announced that because of a USA TODAY investigation it is dropping plans to accept recruits who had a history of self-mutilation, bipolar disorder, and drug and alcohol abuse. Tom Vanden Brook first broke the story over the weekend about the plan – which the military hadn’t even revealed to the Senate Armed Services Committee. The backlash was immediate. “If you took a poll of this committee right now I doubt if you’d find a single one who would be approving of this practice, which we now find out about reading the daily newspaper,” committee chair John McCain said. “We should have been told about this before it showed up in a USA TODAY article.”
Second, Nick Penzenstadler of the investigative team broke the story that taxpayers are footing the bill for lawsuits related to Trump’s private businesses. He found that at least 10 government lawyers are defending cases stemming from Trump’s controversial decision not to divest himself from companies that earn profits from foreign governments and officials. As he writes, “The Justice Department for weeks refused to answer questions about how many employees were working on the cases and for how long, falsely saying the agency doesn't track such information. USA TODAY identified the government legal staff who are defending Trump’s business profits using the agency's own internal case-tracking database, obtained under the Freedom of Information Act.”
Third, just last week, after a USA TODAY investigation uncovered the Department of Veterans Affairs’ efforts to conceal the shoddy care, mistakes, and misdeeds of its staff members in their care of veterans, several senators pledged to hold the VA accountable. In its initial investigation, USA TODAY found that the VA spent nearly $6.7 million to settle cases with problem employees guilty of negligence and misconduct behind closed doors, allowing for their resignation with a clean record instead of termination. On November 9, two senators introduced a bipartisan bill forcing the VA to report disciplinary actions against medical providers to a national database in order to prevent problem doctors from hiding past issues when moving into private practice. The bill would also require the VA to report discipline within 30 days to state medical boards as well as ban the agency from eliminating negative records from practitioners’ personnel files as a term of severance.
Finally, as a follow up to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel’s investigation into blackouts, assaults and deaths at Mexican resorts, Pulitzer Prize winning reporter Raquel Rutledge uncovered that TripAdvisor had muzzled first-hand stories of blackouts, rapes and other injuries while vacationing at highly rated resorts in Mexico. The crowdsource ratings site repeatedly deleted their posts, claiming that they were “determined inappropriate by the TripAdvisor community.” In response to the Journal Sentinel’s reports, TripAdvisor launched a new badge system this week, alerting travelers to media coverage of health and safety concerns at various hotels, restaurants and attractions. The company’s action is the latest development in the evolving investigation as the U.S. State Department warned tourists about tainted alcohol at Mexico resorts earlier this year in July and U.S. Senators are calling for more action to protect American tourists.
The follow-up actions in response to our reporting is a testament to the impactful journalism the network provides. I am proud of our dedicated journalists and the impact their stories are making nationwide.
Sincerely,
Joanne Lipman, chief content officer of Gannett, and editor in chief of USA TODAY and USA TODAY NETWORK
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2hFpd5W
