Trump-Putin bromance unnerves the Baltics: David Andelman
CONNECTTWEET 28 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
RIGA, Latvia — Nearly a third of the population of this Baltic nation, including the mayor of this capital city, is of Russian origin. Not a single American television channel is carried in any major hotel, though a half dozen broadcast in Russian.
Yet there are few nations as devoutly committed to America and NATO than the Baltic States of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania, the only alliance members that were once enslaved components of the former Soviet Union. And none look so desperately to America for support, perhaps their very survival.
The looming threat before them is Donald Trump and his suggestion that the United States may no longer respect its half-century commitment to the security of each NATO member.
Here, the challenge posed by Vladimir Putin is real and immediate. With training exercises of massed Russian armor just beyond their frontiers, fear is a constant undercurrent. The Latvians fear not only the election of Trump, but also the powerful feelings his comments appear to have aroused among Americans and in Congress, and which may linger long after the Nov. 8 election.
“America is electing not only its own president but a president for the whole world — not a policeman, but a decisive force in many aspects — economic, political, security, and also very important for Atlantic unity and our survival,” Lithuania’s foreign minister Linas Linkevičius told me in an interview.

Putin and Russia are a very real presence just across the 132 miles of frontier the two countries share. Valdis Zatlers, president of Latvia from 2007 through 2011, has dealt directly with Putin on numerous occasions, but listens carefully to the comments from Trump. “We are used to that scale of lies from Putin, but we are not yet used to an American leader lying so often,” Zatlers said in an interview. “Just the one sentence was very stupid — that the United States might hesitate to support the Baltics in the case of military conflict. He must understand that people take him seriously because he is not just an average person in a pub.”
In all three nations I visited during a two-week swing, people repeatedly expressed a vocal hope that no matter who becomes president in January, he or she will not repeat what proved a central failure of the early days of the Obama presidency: a “reset” to smooth relations with Russia. All fear the kind of overly friendly Russian-American relationship that seems to be in the cards for a Trump presidency. On the wall of Keule Rua, a hip barbecue restaurant just outside the Old Town of Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania, is an enormous caricature of Trump and Putin puckering up to each other, with the caption, “Make everything great again.”
But things will not be great unless NATO maintains its steadfast opposition to any Russian military adventures in the region, and the United States remains determined to honor the pledge in Article 5 of the NATO treaty that an attack on one is an attack on all. “We will not be constructively ambiguous,” observed Paul Teesalu, political director of Estonia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. “We will be constructively clear. This is NATO territory and there is an allied commitment here.”

POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media
The ministry happens to be located in the building that until 1990 housed the central committee of the Estonian Communist Party. Today, not two miles away, is the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defense Center. The military encampment, surrounded by barbed-wire topped walls, is ground zero for what could prove to be the opening volleys of the next East-West conflict — what is becoming popularly known in these parts as “hybrid” or “asymmetric” war. And the NATO team is ready. Indeed, much time is spent in defining the “red line” that must be crossed before a cyberattack can be considered an act of war, triggering Article 5 and a full-scale response. It hasn’t been crossed yet. But the folks here know what it is.
So do the Russians and especially Putin, many in the Baltics believe. Zatlers spent years dealing one-on-one with the Russian president and now he is worried. “You need to have a little bit of experience, how Russians behave,” he said slowly. “They need to control their society, so they try to prepare their society. So you look at what their leaders say on TV, and you can really predict. Now, they are talking about nuclear war, so I am really scared they are preparing the population for nuclear war. It seems like a chicken game. Two cars trying to see who will escape. The problem is one of the cars, the Russian car, doesn't have brakes.”
America must provide both the brakes and an adroit driver.
David A. Andelman, a member of the USA TODAY Board of Contributors, is editor-emeritus of World Policy Journal and author of A Shattered Peace: Versailles 1919 and the Price We Pay Today. Follow him on Twitter @DavidAndelman.
You can read diverse opinions from our Board of Contributors and other writers on the Opinion front page, on Twitter @USATOpinion and in our daily Opinion newsletter
CONNECTTWEET 28 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2fdfjDi
