Zion National Park: Finding a road less traveled
CLOSE

 Visitors quickly see why Zion National Park gets its name from the Hebrew word for refuge. Video shot by Pat Shannahan, the Arizona Republic. USA TODAY NETWORK

Visitor numbers at Zion National Park are skyrocketing, which often means long lines to enter the park, to board shuttles and even to access certain trails.
In 2016, the park set a record with nearly 4.3 million visitors, 17% more than the previous record — set in 2015.
Jana Schleif of Marktoberdorf, Germany, spent a week in April exploring Zion with two friends. They happened to hit the park at the same time many U.S. students were also visiting for spring break, resulting in massive crowds.
The three Europeans managed to get the last spot at the campground and also faced overcrowding on the popular Angels Landing Trail, which follows a narrow ridge with steep drops on both sides to the top of a 1,488-foot-high sandstone cliff. Schleif said she loved the view but there were too many people to fully enjoy the experience.
“We started early, but there were still a lot of people,” she said. “When we hiked down it was very, very crowded.”
Replay
Last SlideNext Slide
Joe Braun, a photographer from Ann Arbor, Mich., has been visiting Zion regularly since 1975, when he was a small child. He knows the park so well he has created a website dedicated to hiking in it with more than 70 detailed route descriptions.
Braun acknowledged that crowds have grown tremendously since he first began visiting in the 1970s, but most of the crowding is found in the Zion Canyon section, where hikers flock to popular trails like Angels Landing, Emerald Pools and the Riverside Walk. They generally stay away from hikes longer than 3 miles, he said.
To avoid crowds, Braun suggests hiking longer, less popular trails in Zion Canyon like Sandbench Loop or Hidden Canyon. Outside of Zion Canyon, the park also offers hiking along trails like Hop Valley and Northgate Peaks in the Kolob Terrace section of the park. Braun said any hike in the park’s Southwest Desert section is likely to be free of people.
Schleif and her friends discovered that in April as they backpacked through the Southwest Desert and camped out under the stars at night.
“We really enjoyed the silence and the nature,” she said. “We really enjoyed the mountains that had stripes of different colors. They were so beautiful.”
However, exploring the Southwest Desert requires a permit and backcountry know-how. Schleif’s group had to purify drinking water along the way. Plus, during the summer the temperatures can climb to the triple digits with little shade.
So despite the people overflow, it is possible to find solitude in Zion. Yet Braun said he still worries about damage from the increase in visitors, who seem to have less experience with the outdoors and things like the idea of “leave no trace.” He said evidence left by visitors, including litter, stacks of rocks and even etched “graffiti” on canyon walls, makes the easily accessible areas of Zion feel more like a city.
“As the park gets more and more crowded, I hope more resources can be spent to teach people about ‘leave no trace’ principles and basic respect for what is acceptable behavior on national park lands,” he said.
About the park
Size: 146,597 acres.
Visitors: 4.3 million in 2016.
Established:1919.
History: Indigenous people and later Mormon settlers inhabited the park before its establishment in 1909 as Mukuntuweap National Monument by President William Howard Taft. Its name was changed to Zion in 1918 before Congress established it as a national park in 1919. The Kolob section of the park was first protected as Zion National Monument in 1937 and later incorporated into the park in 1956.
When visiting: Campgrounds and parking lots fill up early, especially on weekends and holidays. Avoid hassles by parking in nearby Springdale and riding the shuttle system to the park. For more info: 435-772-3256 or nps.gov/zion/.
Of note: While the Zion Canyon section of the park is the most iconic and popular area in Zion, the Kolob Terrace and Kolob Canyons sections in the northwest offer a chance to get away from crowds while still experiencing Zion’s signature sandstone formations.
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2sgX98j
