Changes at Bloomberg include ouster of digital chief
There's only so much flash that Michael Bloomberg will take.
Since rejoining the media empire he founded and controls, Bloomberg L.P., late last year, the 73-year old billionaire has moved quickly to reassert his authority. He hired a new editorial czar. Newsroom management was reshuffled. He reiterated support for the fledgling TV operation. Layoffs occurred while a hiring spree continued.
Staffers have come to expect constant change at Bloomberg as it seeks to redefine itself amid looming competition in a competitive media landscape. And the company's latest move Friday – the ouster of top digital editor Joshua Topolsky – is yet another reflection of shifting priorities and allegiances under the new regime.
Bloomberg L.P. revealed Friday that Topolsky, who joined as editor of digital news initiatives last year, was leaving as a result of creative and directional differences with his superiors over digital strategy.

Bloomberg.com was relaunched in January under Topolsky's watch, with stories from its wire service, Bloomberg Businessweek and other editorial employees of Bloomberg Media, the consumer media arm. While the site's main focus is clearly business and economics, it also contains general news and political coverage.
With large font headlines, square tiles and bright, purple bars that highlight stories, its user-friendliness stands in direct contrast to the more straight-laced approach that has been associated with the wire service, Bloomberg News. Stories about the bond market and Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen's economic outlook run on the homefront, along with listicles about best places for affordable rents and a story about the World Cup victory parade for U.S. Women's national team.
Bloomberg wasn't a fan of the design or presentation, which reflects Topolsky's Web 2.0 sensibilities honed from running tech news sites The Verge and Engadget. Bloomberg, one of the world's wealthiest men who made his fortune on Wall Street, wanted a tighter focus on business, markets and economics.
But their disagreement also spoke of a broader culture clash between the traditionalist faction -- one that sees maintaining the quality of the very lucrative news-data terminals as the overriding priority -- and the digital-savvy arrivals who are tasked to broaden Bloomberg's audience through new media products, says a former Bloomberg staffer who declined to be named to speak freely about the company. "It's bittersweet to admit, but my appetite for change is even larger than I expected it to be when I arrived at the company," Topolsky said in a statement.

Bloomberg came back to run the company after serving 12 years as New York City mayor and late last year hired the editor of The Economist, John Micklethwait, to run all news operations. Ostensibly with Bloomberg's blessing, Micklethwait quickly consolidated editorial control of the entire Bloomberg's news division, including the wire service and the assets of Bloomberg Media, whose portfolio includes Bloomberg TV, Bloomberg Businessweek, news websites and other magazines. Justin B. Smith, CEO of Bloomberg Media, still reports directly to Bloomberg. And the editors of Bloomberg Media properties report to Smith in business matters.
Many of Bloomberg Media's initiatives to find new audiences were started prior to Bloomberg's return. But once he came back, Bloomberg reemphasized the terminal as the company's top point of emphasis. New digital revenue, while welcome, would only make up a tiny percentage of total revenue, said to be about $9 billion. The idea of the new expansion strategy is not to introduce new products that would compete with CNN but more about nabbing the readers who flock to The Wall Street Journal, The Financial Times and The Economist.
"I read (Topolsky's departure) as Michael Bloomberg putting his stamp and influence back on the operation," said Chris Roush, a journalism professor at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and a former Bloomberg staffer. "He liked The Economist, and that's why he hired Micklethwait. Bloomberg is all about trying to gain influence. And the most influential people are the people who are more interested in highbrow coverage."
CONNECTTWEET 5 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1ITI5CQ
