All Lives Matter movement for Muslims? Your Say
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Letter to the editor:
While many Americans vehemently protested President Trump’s discriminatory policy to ban Muslim refugees, one social movement was oddly absent from the protests: All Lives Matter.
In the wake of many police killings of unarmed black men, women and children, a social movement spurred across the United States and other parts of the world. This movement was called Black Lives Matter. Some people took offense to the name of the movement and started a counter movement: All Lives Matter. In many homes, showing support for one group or the other was a sure way to start a feud over dinner.
Where were the All Lives Matter supporters when Trump signed a travel ban of people from Muslim-majority countries? In fact, where were they throughout the election? Their silence is telling. It tells that they do not actually care about all lives as long as they don’t feel that anyone is encroaching on their rights. An inherent part of equality is that it must be for all.
It almost seems ridiculous to say because it should be so obvious: Of course Black Lives Matter. Of course Hispanic, Asian and LGBTQ lives matter. Everyone matters. And I must reaffirm: Muslim Lives Matter.
The Declaration of Independence, states: "All men are created equal ... with certain unalienable rights." A key American value is that every person — regardless of race, ethnicity, religion, gender or sexual orientation — should have the same rights and opportunities.
The values Trump purports are not the ones I stand for as a U.S. military veteran. His values are not the reason I put on the uniform. Through three deployments with the Army, I got to know many Muslims. They are some of the nicest, most generous, welcoming people I came to know. I’m proud to call many Muslims some of my closest friends. You have mattered, you do matter and you will always matter.
As a law student studying international human rights, I want to ensure that all people have equal rights and that these rights are protected. Refugees of all religions and ethnicities have suffered enough.
As you look at America, please look to more than Trump. Look to us as a whole and as individuals. Know that we support and stand by you. We value you. To us, you matter. As we deal with this issue, let’s stand together as a unified body to assert that Muslim Lives Matter.
David Thompson; Lexington, Va.
Facebook comments are edited for clarity and grammar: 
President Trump is trying to tear down our democracy. First, de-legitimize news media. Second, de-legitimize the courts and judges. Third, de-legitimize members of Congress. This is how dictators remove all obstacles in their way to absolute power. Once those are all gone, who holds a president accountable?
— Barry Gold
When liberals start out talking about the "core principles" of the Constitution, they have already lost. That phrase means that they can't find legal standing.
In a nutshell, the liberal argument is that mean Trump won't extend constitutional rights to everyone in the world and they don't like it. The Supreme Court will definitely side with him and actual laws rather than principles.
— Chad Clausen 
@USATODAY Trumps #1 goal? Keep us safe and defeat Isis . We need to support it
— Sherry Nilram (@sherrynilram) February 8, 2017
I think that we need to look beyond the legalities of this and determine what the broader public/political ramifications this might have for us. Many of these people are escaping persecution in their own countries. If we refuse to admit them as refugees, they may be imprisoned or wore. We did this in 1939 with almost 1,000 Jewish refugees from Germany and many died. How will history treat us? How will this ban impact other foreign policy decisions?
— Michael S. Ellegood
All Trump has to do is show the problems that Europe is having with these refugees from these seven countries. Refugees from the countries banned pose a threat. If a court decides against Trump, it is a sad day for our country.
— Jason Edwards
@USATODAY Fact: Trump made America a target, made us less safe & became the poster boy for ISIS & al-queda recruitment worldwide.
— Moses (@MosesDidItBest) February 8, 2017
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2kUjad2
