UPS on-time deliveries dipped in a few areas
Corrections & Clarifications: The name of the company Jim Prewitt works for was misstated in an earlier version of this story. Prewitt is vice president for retail industry strategy at JDA Software.
SAN FRANCISCO – UPS experienced a dip in on-time deliveries during the week of Nov. 29 through Dec. 5, as Americans shopped early, often and online.
UPS’ on-time deliveries fell to 91% in the period, according to ShipMatrix, a shipping software company, They usually stand at about 97%, said spokesman Mark D’Amico.
The good news for UPS and its customers, is that the problems weren't widespread. Delayed packages were concentrated in a few areas of California, Texas and New York, UPS said.
United Parcel Service expects to deliver about 30 million packages a day between Black Friday and Dec. 31, for a total of 630 million overall, up 10% from last year, according to spokesman Steve Gaut.
Rival FedEx is expecting a record number of holiday shipments this year, fueled largely by the steady rise of e-commerce.

"As online shopping patterns continue to shift, we are experiencing volume surges earlier than ever before," said spokeswoman Rae Lyn. "We are working hard to absorb the extra volumes."
The big question is whether the slowdown was a temporary glitch. Given the holiday delivery delays that surfaced in 2013 that resulted in some packages not making it in time for Christmas, retailers and shippers have really “staffed up” this year, said Tom Forte, a senior analyst with Brean Capital in New York. “They’re ready for a big pick up in volume,” he said.
Drivers feeling the increase
One strategy UPS is using to get packages through the system quickly is top-offs. UPS brings packages to strategic locations around the city, so drivers don't have to go all the way back to the warehouse to pick up more.
“I’ll reload my truck three times today," said driver Leo Parker, a 27-year UPS veteran who works in San Francisco.

Parker says he's seeing a sharp uptick in package deliveries for Christmas. On a typical summer day, he might deliver 200 packages, but in the weeks before Christmas it's closer to 300 over days that can stretch to 14 hours.
“I’ve got about 250 Amazon Prime customers on my route, so my deliveries are already way up,” he said. Amazon Prime is the company’s popular paid membership program that includes free two-day shipping, access to digital movies and music and other perks.
Omni-Channel
One thing that's making this year different and more complex for retailers and shippers alike is the rise of omni-channel fulfillment. To compete with online merchants, traditional stores are offering shoppers multiple options for how they’ll get their packages. That can include buying online and picking up in a store or buying in a store and having the purchase delivered.
“This simply wasn’t available so much two years ago, so it’s difficult for companies to predict their shipping demand,” said Jim Prewitt, vice president for retail industry strategy at JDA Software, an expert on intelligent fulfillment.
If companies start to run up against bottlenecks in shipping capacity, they might try to convince customers to buy online and pick up in a store, Prewitt said.
How they'd do that is still anyone's guess. One possibility would be to offer discounts, but he said "it’s really to early to know if that might happen.”
CONNECTTWEET 13 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1QBwXNW
