NTSB: Amtrak engineer says he didn't notice reduced-speed signs before fatal crash
CLOSE

 Whimpering in pain, suffering from injuries and dazed by the enormity of the crash, victims of the Amtrak train derailment south of Seattle called 911 for help. Emergency recordings released Wednesday provide a vivid account of what happened. (Dec. 27) AP

WASHINGTON – The Amtrak engineer seriously injured in the fatal derailment south of Seattle last month that he planned to slow down a mile before the fatal curve, but that he didn’t see a reduced speed-limit sign two miles before the curve, investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board announced Thursday.
The train was traveling about 80 mph approaching the curve posted for 30 mph, investigators have said earlier. The train on its first commercial run on new tracks derailed at a bridge in DuPont, Wash., over Interstate 5, killing three passengers and injuring 62 people before coming to rest with cars dangling over the highway.
The 55-year-old engineer and a 48-year-old conductor in training, who was in the lead locomotive at the time of the crash, had been too seriously injured to speak with investigators immediately after the Dec. 18 accident. They were interviewed the week of Jan. 15.
The engineer, who was hired by Amtrak in 2004 as a conductor and became an engineer in 2013, said he felt rested before the shift, the NTSB said Thursday.
The engineer recalled traveling 79 mph at milepost 15.5 along the Point Defiance Bypass, a new section of track installed to shave 10 minutes off the four-hour ride from Seattle to Portland.
The engineer told investigators he was aware of the 30 mph curve at milepost 19.8, and that he planned to start slowing down a mile before the curve.
But after seeing mileposts 16 and 17, the engineer didn’t recall seeing milepost 18 or the 30 mph speed sign about two miles before the curve, investigators said.
More about the Amtrak crash: 
The engineer told investigators that he didn’t consider having a qualifying conductor in the cab to be a distraction.
The conductor told investigators that there was minimal conversation during the trip because he was looking at paperwork to learn the territory. Just before the derailment, the conductor looked up from copies of track bulletins when he heard the engineer mumble something and sensed the train was becoming “airborne,” investigators said.
The tracks had equipment installed to automatically brake trains to prevent collisions or derailments when engineers don't respond to posted speed limits or track closures.
Central Puget Sound Regional Transit Authority, known as Sound Transit, which owns the tracks at the accident site, said it was still testing the equipment called Positive Train Control when the train derailed. Sound Transit has said it expects to have it in operation by the end of June.
The NTSB hasn’t drawn any conclusions about what caused the accident or what might have prevented it. The investigation is expected to take at least another year to complete.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2Fdhl1t
