Jimmy Kimmel tweets Trump during Oscars, gets 100K retweets in 5 minutes
3 Shares 




CLOSE

 President Trump has a reputation for tweeting about entertainment events and firing back at his critics Time
The Oscars telecast was two hours in and President Trump hadn't tweeted anything about the show. Jimmy Kimmel was surprised.
So, the host decided to goad Trump, sending out two messages live from the Dolby Theatre. The first: "Hey @realDonaldTrump, u up?" And then: "#merylsayshi"
Hey @realDonaldTrump u up?
— Jimmy Kimmel (@jimmykimmel) February 27, 2017
@realDonaldTrump#Merylsayshi
— Jimmy Kimmel (@jimmykimmel) February 27, 2017
In under five minutes, the first tweet had more than 100,000 retweets. A few minutes later, it became Kimmel's most-retweeted tweet.
So will the president receive those messages after his showing at the Governors Ball tonight? Kimmel is counting on it.
After all, the MC said: "Some of you will get to come up here on this stage tonight and give a speech that the President of the United States will tweet about in all caps during his 5:00 a.m. bowel movement tomorrow, and I think that’s pretty darn excellent if you ask me.”

 Twitter has field day after worst flub in Oscar history 

 Best picture Oscar? 'Moonlight' but it's a little confusing 

 The best and worst dressed at the 2017 Oscars 

 Celebs honor Trayvon Martin at Oscars with 'Hoodies up' 

 Emma Stone can't believe the Oscar flub too 

 Viola Davis is overwhelmed by her Oscar win 

 15 worst dressed celebs of awards season 

 'Moonlight' director and his Tallahassee roots 

 Why 'Salesman' director did not go to the Oscars 

 Lin-Manuel Miranda supports ACLU with ribbon at Oscars 

 Why Ruth Negga wears an ACLU pin on the red carpet 

 8-year-old Sunny Pawar is too cute at the Oscars 

 'Hidden Figures' director: Movies like this matter 

 'Hidden Figures' men share how they prep for the Oscars 

 'White Helmets' cinematographer delayed in Syria 

 The Academy rescinds an Oscar nomination 

 Walk down the Oscars red carpet in 60 seconds 

 Who should win an Oscar and who actually will 

 Who is the Academy’s ‘Oscar’ & how does he get made? 

 Will stars play it safe or take style risks at the Oscars? 

 10 things cameras don't catch at the Oscars 

 A look back: Oscar moments from USA TODAY photographers 

 Red carpet is rolled out ahead of the 2017 Oscars 

 Celebs shine through Oscars fabulous fashion history 

 Jimmy Kimmel to host 2017 Oscars 

 Oscar nominees: Best picture 

 Oscar nominees: Best director 

 Oscar nominees: Best actor 

 Oscar nominees: Best actress 

 Academy Awards 2017: Best Actor nominee Ryan Gosling 

 Academy Awards 2017: Best Actor nominee Denzel Washington 

 Academy Awards 2017: Best Actor nominee Casey Affleck 

 Academy Awards 2017: Best Supporting Actor nominee Mahershala Ali 




Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2lKExx2
