Universal Orlando: Seven years of Butterbeer and still going strong
Seven years ago this summer, Butterbeer made a magical milestone.
When Universal Orlando opened the Wizarding World of Harry Potter on June 18, 2010, J.K. Rowling's fantasy world came to life, and, like "Harry Potter land," Butterbeer became a star.
"We found out very, very quickly when we opened that Butterbeer was definitely an overnight homerun," said Steven Jayson, corporate executive chef of Universal Orlando Parks and Resorts. With Rowling's blessing, Jayson and his staff concocted the recipe for the magical brew. "Hands down, that's the one thing that we've created here at Universal Orlando that stands alone."
Consisting of a cream soda-meets-butterscotch flavor and a sweet whipped topping, Butterbeer originally came in two versions: cold and frozen. Since its debut, Universal has introduced a steaming beverage known as "Butterbeer hot" along with Butterbeer ice cream and Butterbeer fudge.
"You want these beverages to be cool, and I don't mean cold. You want them to be neat," Jayson said. "You want people to see them and be excited and say, 'I've got to try that.' And then when they get it, they're excited about what they got, that they love it.

 This June 18, 2010 file photo shows park guests Jillian Woodworth, left, and Steven Hopke as they try Butterbeer at the grand opening of the Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Universal Orlando. JOHN RAOUX/AP FILE
 Actors John Travolta and wife Kelly Preston became immersed in the Wizarding World of Harry Potter during their visit to Universal Orlando Resort on Sept. 5, 2010, in Orlando, Florida. After sipping Butterbeer at the Hog's Head pub, Travolta and Preston stepped into Ollivanders wand shop, where the wand chooses the wizard. Matt Stroshane/Universal Orlando Resort via Getty Images
 Aylin Mujica, Cuban actress and model, and her husband, actor Gabriel Valenzuela, visited Hogsmeade at the Wizarding World of Harry Potter, in Universal Orlando on July 3, 2011. During their visit, the couple and their family went to Hogwarts and enjoyed Butterbeer, a favorite drink inside the Harry Potter books and films, in addition to enjoying all the rides and attractions at Universal Orlando. Universal Orlando Resort via Getty Images
 This June 9, 2010, file photo shows Erin Wuchte as she serves up Butterbeer to guests at the Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Universal Orlando. Harry has conjured all the magic Universal expected, and then some. In the quarter after the attraction opened, crowds at Universal parks swelled by 36 percent over the same stretch last year, while attendance at Disney's Orlando parks stayed roughly the same. JOHN RAOUX/AP FILE
 A homemade version of Butterbeer is seen in this June 28, 2010, photo. Butterbeer, the drink of choice in the popular Harry Potter book series, is now the drink of choice at the new Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Universal Orlando in Florida. LARRY CROWE/AP FILE
Last SlideNext Slide
Over the years, countless foodies and companies have tried to deconstruct the recipe. And when they can't figure it out, they come up with their own combination.
In March, Yuengling's Ice Cream unveiled its version of Butterbeer ice cream, which contains half buttercream, half butterscotch ice cream, twisted with a butterscotch swirl.
In 2016, Starbucks began offering a Butterbeer latte -- if you ask. Known as the butterscotch latte, the drink doesn't mention Harry Potter (or even Butterbeer) on the menu.
When Melissa Diedricks of Clermont brings her "Butterbeer truffles from Madame Ambrosia's Magical Menagerie" to a comic con, she usually sells out.
Vicky Joyce, co-owner of Oasis Shaved Ice in Cocoa Beach, has cashed in on the Butterbeer craze, too. Customers can't get enough of Oasis' Budder Beer shaved ice.
"It has been, thank the Lord, for over six years been my No. 1 seller by far. By far," she said. "I am blown away by this. It just really blows my mind."
Her stepson and two customers came up with the recipe: butterscotch, caramel and cream soda with sweetened condensed milk and caramel sauce drizzled on top.
In addition to Butterbeer, Universal serves other Potter-themed drinks like Gillywater, Pumpkin Juice and Green Fishy Ale.
But clearly, Butterbeer bests them all.
FLORIDA TODAY asked Jayson if he could top that sweet magical brew.
"That would be big," he said with a smile. "To top Butterbeer, that would be pretty big. They don't come along that often."
Sangalang is FLORIDA TODAY's entertainment reporter.
Contact Sangalang at 321-242-3630
or jsangalang@floridatoday.com.
Twitter: @byjensangalan
Instagram: @byjensangalang
Facebook: /jennifer.sangalang
YouTube: /jennifersangalang
CONNECTTWEET 554 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2tuExTR
