Protesters call for ouster of UC-Davis chancellor
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated UC-Davis Chancellor Linda Katehi’s actions during an “Occupy Davis” protest in 2009. The police force allegedly was solely responsible for the way the protest was broken up.
There’s a battle underway at the University of California-Davis. The cry: “Fire Katehi.”
Katehi is Chancellor Linda Katehi, and a sit-in entering its fourteenth day, is pushing hard for her ouster. The protesters, made up of some 100 students, faculty and staff who are taking shifts, are demanding Katehi’s resignation due to her appointment on the boards of two for-profit companies.
“There’re so many reasons why I’m here,” Becca Mata, a UC-Davis senior and protester tells USA TODAY College. “But it comes down to the fact that Chancellor Katehi has consistently shown that she puts profit over education and we as students and a community want more.”
According to the Sacramento Bee, Katehi has been under fire since it was reported in early March that in addition to working as chancellor, she accepted a $70,000-a-year seat on the board of the DeVry Education Group. DeVry is currently fighting a lawsuit from the Federal Trade Commission, which states that school’s ads for post-grad job placement are inflated and deceptive.
A post shared by  UC Davis (@ucdavis) on Jul 4, 2015 at 2:03pm PDT
Days later, the Bee reported that the chancellor had also received $420,000 in compensation as a board member for John Wiley & Sons, a leading publisher of science and math textbooks for universities.
She is currently paid $424,360 to head the 35,415 student university, according to the Bee.
A week after the appointment was made public and protest ensued, Katehi stepped down from Devry and issued a campus-wide apology.
In her statement she said, “I take my responsibilities as chancellor of UC-Davis, and to the entire University of California, very seriously and sincerely regret having accepted service on boards that create appearances of conflict with my deep commitment to serve UC-Davis and its students. I have resigned from the DeVry board and intend to donate all the stock proceeds I made from serving on the John Wiley and Sons board to a scholarship fund for UC-Davis students.”
But some remained skeptical of her ability lead, and created a #FireKatehi hashtag on Twitter and a Facebook group with over 1,800 likes.
 An illustration featuring @lindakatehi, @devryuniv and Wiley Publishers illustrating why we need to #FireKatehi pic.twitter.com/YrVQ431Wr7
 — Anthony Beck (@omniitonal) March 23, 2016
“It’s nothing against her as a person, but the chancellor is not doing her job,” says Eran Zelnik, a student involved in the 2011 pepper spray attack.
Now a UC-Davis grad student, Zelnik says he’s participating in the sit-in because “we as students have a radically different vision about what public service and leadership means and things will not change until we have someone here who does.”
 Tfw Katehi thinks that a public apology & HALF of her 3rd salary is enough to excuse her actions #FireKatehi pic.twitter.com/MZ6aklXYG1
 — russ (@etahpopa) March 18, 2016
“We’ve actually gotten a lot of support from the community,” says Mata. “There are people delivering food and monetary donations and letters in solidarity. It’s a cause that people support regardless of political affiliation – they just see it as unethical.”
In a letter to students on March 17, Katehi motioned to establish a $200,000 scholarship fund for California undergraduate students at UC-Davis from her Wiley stock proceeds.
“Service on private and public boards is widely recognized as a responsibility of academic leaders,” she wrote. “As a woman and a STEM scholar, my service has helped to correct the chronic lack of diversity on a number of boards. My pledge to the UC-Davis community is to more carefully vet such invitations and to meticulously follow UC approval procedures in the future.”
The university emailed the following statement to USA TODAY College regarding the call for Katehi’s resignation:
“On March 4, UC President Napolitano made the following comments:
‘I appreciate that Chancellor Katehi has apologized and taken responsibility for having accepted board positions that created an appearance of conflicts of interest with her University responsibilities. I deeply value Linda’s strong record in helping to make UC Davis a world-class center of scholarship and research, and continue to believe in the value of her contributions to the University. We will take all steps necessary to prevent a recurrence of this unfortunate incident.’”
According to the statement, the UC Board of Regents meets Wednesday night and will discuss the matter of UC policy on employees serving on outside boards.
Oona Goodin-Smith is an Oakland University student and a USA TODAY College breaking news correspondent.
