Acadia National Park: From sunrise to sunset
CLOSE

 Cadillac Mountain sees the first sunrise in the U.S. in the fall and winter, but there's much more beauty to behold all year round at Acadia National Park. 

The word on Acadia National Park is always “sunrise.” The opportunity to see the sun crawl above the horizon from atop Cadillac Mountain — at 1,530 feet, the highest point on the U.S. Atlantic coast — draws huge crowds. But Acadia offers treats for night owls as well.
In addition to campfire talks and other programs, rangers lead stargazing hikes throughout the summer. Then in September, Acadia will host its ninth annual Night Sky Festival (acadianightskyfestival.org).
John Kelly, management assistant at the park, says the Sept. 21-24 event will offer activities inside and outside the park ranging from the “fun and silly” to the “highly scientific.” In other words, something for everyone. Bar Harbor Whale Watch Co. will offer stargazing cruises with ranger narration, he says.
“September’s the clearest month with low humidity,” Kelly says. “It’s a great month to do stargazing.”

 Explore a rugged, isolated island, far from the sights and sounds of civilization. Surrounded by Lake Superior, Isle Royale National Park in Michigan offers unparalleled solitude and adventures for backpackers, hikers, boaters, kayakers, canoeists and scuba divers. Adam Jewell, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Enter the quiet of the boreal forest and wander beneath spruce and fir trees. Perch on a rock and experience Lake Superior’s moods, which share and change the area’s rugged shoreline. After a day of kayaking, explore the night sky and witness the Milky Way sparkling overhead. This is this northeastern end of Isle Royale National Park in Michigan. Carl TerHaar, www.sharetheexperience.org
 One of the most photogenic places on earth, Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming never disappoints. With a total height of over 13,000 feet, the mountains tower 7,000 feet over the Snake River Valley. Created by geologic forces over the course of 10 million years, don’t you think it’s about time you saw this amazing place for yourself? Michel Hersen, www.sharetheexperience.org
 One of the most beautiful and most photographed scenes in Grand Teton National Park is Schwabacher Landing. On any given morning, a crowd will gather to shoot the reflection of the Teton Range in the quiet stream or beaver ponds. A few years ago, D. Brent Young was lucky enough to capture this amazing photo of a cow moose feeding in the stream with fall color and the towering Teton peaks in the background. D. Brent Young, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Amazing photo of a moose through a light blanket of fog in Grand Teton National Park! Daniel D'Auria captured this image the Cattleman's Bridge site just after sunrise as a lone bull moose was crossing the Snake River. Daniel D'Auria, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Spectacular views aren’t all you can see along Trail Ridge Road at Rocky Mountain National Park in Colorado. Wildlife from mule deer and elk to reptiles and birds call the park home. You can get the feeling that they enjoy the scenery as much as we do. Sam Maier, www.sharetheexperience.org
 A stunning shot of the Milky Way rising over Rocky Mountain National Park’s Longs Peak. At 14,259 feet, Longs Peak towers above all other summits in Rocky Mountain. The flat-topped monarch is seen from almost anywhere in the park. Pat Gaines, www.sharetheexperiece.org
 A petroglyph is an image pecked or engraved on a rock surface. According to one Hopi elder, this petroglyph, found on Mesa Verde National Park’s Petroglyph Point Trail, may tell the story of two clans separating from other people and returning to their place of origin. Like many petroglyphs, this panel seems intended to communicate the oral stories that keep Native American cultures alive. Holly Neill, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Cliff Palace is the largest cliff dwelling in North America. Constructed from sandstone bricks and a mortar of clay, ash and water, these buildings have been standing for more than 800 years as a testament to the architectural skills of Ancestral Pueblo people. Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado preserves these structures so that future generations can learn more about these fascinating people. John Campione, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Kiva is a Hopi word meaning “ceremonial room.” Kivas were important ceremonial gathering places in the life of Ancestral Puebloans -- comparable to the churches, synagogues, temples and mosques of today. It appears that every clan (made up of the extended family) had its own kiva for use during ceremonies and other social events. The light shining into this kiva makes for an excellent picture at Mesa Verde National Park. Robert Fischer, www.sharetheexperience.org
 We found the secret to time travel! Explore Mesa Verde National Park to experience the wonderfully preserved cliff dwellings of the Ancestral Pueblo people. The park contains 5,000+ known archeological sites -- from the cliff dwellings to mesa top sites of pithouses, pueblos, masonry towers and farming structures. A visit here is like going 1,000 years into the past. Thomas Piekunka, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Glacier National Park is not named so much for its small glaciers, but for the colossal work of enormous glaciers in the past. The glaciers remaining in the park today are small, alpine icepacks that melt and refreeze in place. However, evidence shows that many are shrinking and may disappear for good soon. Make sure to hike up to see scenes like this at Grinnell glacier before they’re all gone. Julie Shoemaker, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Many Glacier is considered the heart of Glacier National Park. Massive mountains, active glaciers, sparkling lakes, hiking trails and abundant wildlife make this a favorite of visitors and locals alike. View from one of the overlooks at Many Glacier. Jacob Barber, www.sharetheexperience.org
 With the tallest dunes in North America, Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve in Colorado is a great place for a hike. Eric Magayne captured this shot from High Dune -- one of the park’s most popular spots -- after being caught in a sandstorm near the summit. Nature’s reward: A double rainbow. Eric Magayne, www.sharetheexperience.org
 This is a fascinating sight at Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve in Colorado. Each year in late September, Morris Gulch turns into a golden river of aspen trees. In contrast, the steep slopes and drier and can only support smaller trees and shrubs, so the bright color of the aspens really stands out. Patrick Myers, National Park Service
 Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve is a great place to enjoy the night sky. With little artificial light, the stars shine brightly and the moonlight reflects off the snow and sand, giving everything a blue glow. Patrick Myers, National Park Service
 Every March, thousands of Sandhill cranes stop in Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve on their way to their northern breeding grounds. The fields and wetlands of Colorado’s San Luis Valley provide excellent habitat for these majestic birds. With the dunes and mountains nearby, they dance and call to each other. It’s one of nature’s great spectacles. National Park Service
 This picture from Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve has everything! Fall colors, massive sand dunes and snow capped mountains showcase this marvel of the West. Visiting here is an experience unlike anywhere else. Did you know you can sled down the dunes? National Park Service
 On an October morning, photographer Howard Hill went out to Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park in Colorado hoping for a great sunrise picture. When a morning rain storm passed, he ended up with something even better: This great rainbow shot from the canyon rim. Howard Hill, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Because of the sheer, tall cliffs, the bottom of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison in Colorado only gets a few hours of direct sunlight each day. It can often seem like a dark and haunting place. This awesome detail of the cliff face captures that feeling. Chris Hatfield, www.sharetheexperience.org
 The Black Canyon hosts a variety of ecosystems -- from pinyon pine, juniper and scrub oak forests at the rim to the shady and vertical inner canyon walls, and down to the riparian community along the Gunnison River. If you get lucky, you might see strange and interesting wildlife like this collared lizard. Kayla Delk, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Big enough to be overwhelming, still intimate enough to feel the pulse of time, Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park in Colorado exposes you to some of the steepest cliffs, oldest rock and craggiest spires in North America. With two million years to work, the Gunnison River -- along with the forces of weathering -- has sculpted this vertical wilderness of rock, water and sky. Nina Mayer Ritchie, www.sharetheexperience.org
 A place of wonder and epic views, Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park is an often overlooked park in Colorado. Once you see the 2,000 foot tall, narrow canyon walls dropping almost vertically to the Gunnison River, you’ll never forget it. National Park Service
 A photo of two cute bobcat kittens with their mother at Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park in Colorado. Sometimes called wildcats, bobcats are roughly twice as big as the average house cat. They have long legs, large paws, and tufted ears, and gets its name for its tail, which appears to be cut or "bobbed." Female bobcats typically have 2-4 kittens. Usually born in spring, the kittens begin traveling with mom within a few months and hunting on their own by fall. National Park Service
 Olympic National Park in Washington has something for everyone. In between the gorgeous beaches and majestic mountains, there are deep, old-growth forests with wandering rivers to explore. You’ll never want to leave this place of amazing natural beauty. Rick May, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Sunset at Point of the Arches in Olympic National Park. Part of the park's remote Shi Shi Beach, Point of the Arches features rock formations called sea stacks that stretch into the Pacific Ocean. The best time to visit is April through October, but the beach can get busy during the summer months. Andy Porter, www.sharetheexperience.org
 With over 922,000 acres, Olympic National Park in Washington is a land of beauty and variety. A day's exploration can take you from breathtaking mountain vistas with meadows of wildflowers to colorful ocean tide pools. This stunning photo was taken during sunrise at the park's Second Beach. Glenn Nelson, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Visitors to Olympic National Park can take in fantastic views of scenic vistas of snow-capped peaks and subalpine forests at Hurricane Ridge, the park’s most easily accessed location in high country. Hurricane Ridge has a number of hiking trails, from ridgetop traverses to steep trails that descend to subalpine lakes and valleys. Jayasimha Murthy, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Many first time visitors to Death Valley are surprised it is not covered with a sea of sand. Less than one percent of the desert is covered with dunes, yet the shadowed ripples and stark, graceful curves define "desert" in our imaginations. The Mesquite Flat Dunes are the best known and easiest to visit in the national park. A dramatic shot of the Mesquite Flat Sand Dunes at sunrise. Greg Clure, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Nestled in a remote valley between the Cottonwood and Last Chance Ranges, the Racetrack is a place of stunning beauty and mystery. The Racetrack is a playa -- a dry lakebed -- best known for its strange moving rocks (sometimes weighing hundreds of pounds). Although no one has actually seen the rocks move, the long meandering tracks left behind in the mud surface of the playa attest to their activity. Marc Davis, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Located in both California and Nevada, Death Valley is the largest national park in the lower 48 states. Andrii Iasynetskyi snapped this amazing photo from Zabriskie Point at first light. With the sun still below the horizon, creating an unbelievably beautiful purplish red glow, and the moon still high in the sky, “this moment was huge luck in a photographic sense,” Andrii says. Andrii Iasynetskyi, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Death Valley National Park never disappoints with 3.4 million acres of desert and mountains. Donna Fullerton captured this gorgeous view as a storm rolled in, giving more color and contrast to the Grapevine Mountains while churning sand creates the illusion of fog. Donna Fullerton, www.sharetheexperience.org
 For a short time in February -- if the conditions are perfect -- Horsetail Fall at Yosemite National Park in California looks like lava falling down the side of El Capitan. Visitors flock to the park with the hopes of seeing this phenomenon, which happens when sunset hits the waterfall at just the right angle, illuminating the water in brilliant reds and oranges. It’s a spectacular sight reminiscent of Yosemite’s historic Firefall. Photo from 2012. Anthony Bonafede, www.sharetheexperience.org
 If you could wish upon a star and be transported anywhere, we recommend Yosemite National Park. In Yosemite Valley or the backcountry, at sunset or under a starry sky, Yosemite can make your dreams come true. Photo of Nevada Falls at night. Jeremy Evans, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Yosemite National Park is home to countless waterfalls. Spring is the best time to enjoy waterfalls, when snowmelt sends water raging down the mountain walls. Peak runoff typically occurs in May or June, with some waterfalls (including Yosemite Falls seen here) often only a trickle or completely dry by August. Storms in late fall rejuvenate some of the waterfalls before winter’s frost coats the valley. Kristopher Schoenleber, www.sharetheexperience.org
 It doesn’t get much better than the views found at Grand Canyon National Park in Arizona. With seemingly unlimited vistas to the east and west, it is popular for both sunrise and sunset. This sunrise looks even better with some snow catching the light. Steve Perry, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Grand Canyon National Park in Arizona is probably even bigger than you think. As the crow flies, Grand Canyon Village on the South Rim and the lodge on the North Rim are only about 10 miles apart. However, to drive between them through the park, over the Colorado River and loop around the canyon, you have to travel 212 miles. That’s just one small way to understand the immensity of this incredible place. W. Tyson Joye, National Park Service
 It’s hard to sit at the bottom of Grand Canyon National Park and imagine how all of this incredible landscape was created. Watching the waters of the Colorado River still working against the towering stone walls, you realize the only answer is time. The forces of erosion took around 6 million years to carve this masterpiece. Carl Beams, (www.sharetheexperience.org
 On February 26, 1919, this Arizona icon became a national park. Before it was a park, the Grand Canyon was first protected in 1893 as part of Grand Canyon Forest Reserve, helping to spread the word about the area’s awe-inspiring beauty. Jack Denger (www.sharetheexperience.org
 Sunsets are amazing at the Grand Canyon National Park in Arizona. Randy Langstraat captured this pic from Cape Royal -- a point that provides a panorama up, down, and across the canyon. With seemingly unlimited vistas to the east and west, it is popular for both sunrise and sunset. Cape Royal is on the North Rim of the park, which will open for summer in May. Randy Langstraat, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Sunset from one of the most beautiful places in the world: Grand Canyon National Park. Grand Canyon’s immense size is hard to comprehend. Unique combinations of geologic color and erosional forms decorate a canyon that is 277 river miles long and up to 18 miles wide. Robert Shuman, www.sharetheexperience.org
 A storm blankets Grand Canyon National Park in a layer of snow, creating this picturesque winter scene. While it often snows on the North and South Rims of the canyon during winter, the New Year's Storm that hit Arizona in 2015 brought snow all the way to the bottom of the canyon (a rare occurrence for the park). Michael Quinn, National Park Service
 Sunrise from one of the most beautiful places on the east coast: Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Ridge upon ridge of forest straddles the border between North Carolina and Tennessee in the Great Smoky Mountains. Santosh Kanthety snapped this photo of the park’s rolling mountains as first light illuminated the gorgeous fall colors. Santosh Kanthety, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Spring is an amazing time to explore Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Pictured here is part of Roaring Fork, which offers rushing mountain streams, glimpses of old-growth forest, and a number of well-preserved log cabins, grist mills and other historic buildings. Barry Pettis (www.sharetheexperience.org
 A bear cub hanging out in a tree at Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Black bears give birth during hibernation, and the female bears and their cubs usually emerge from their winter dens in late March and early April. Matt & Delia Hills, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Located in the Cades Cove part of Great Smoky Mountains National Park, the trail to Abram Falls traverses pine-oak forest on the ridges and hemlock and rhododendron forest along the creek. At the end, you’re rewarded with stunning views of Abrams Falls that are pretty special in the autumn. Monica Noll, www.sharetheexperience.org
 The observation tower at Clingmans Dome looms like a flying saucer against startrails in a purple night. Offering amazing views of Great Smoky Mountains National Park in Tennessee, the tower rests on the third highest mountain east of the Mississippi. Philip Varney, www.sharetheexperience.org
 In the mid-1800s, painters of the Hudson River School flocked to Mount Desert Island in Maine and glorified its natural beauty with their brushstrokes -- inspiring patrons and friends to explore the area. As more people came to savor the fresh salt air, beautiful scenery and relaxed pace, the fame and popularity of this gorgeous coastline grew. After years of preservation efforts, this lovely landscape became Acadia National Park in 1929. Michael Rickard, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Bass Harbor Head Light is the only lighthouse on Mount Desert Island in Acadia National Park. Currently a private residence for the commander of the local Coast Guard unit, the lighthouse dates back to 1858. Short trails lead to the shoreline on either side and provide spectacular views, especially at sunset. Jeremy Stevens, www.sharetheexperience.org
 With a record of 338 bird species encountered, Acadia National Park is considered one of the premier bird-watching areas in the country. In the forest or along the water, listen for calls and look for movement. If you get lucky, you could even spot a bald eagle. Kent Miller, National Park Service
 If you want to be the first person to see the sunrise in the continental U.S., you’ll need to take an early hike up Cadillac Mountain in Acadia National Park. As the sun peeks above the horizon and lights the Maine coastline, you’ll be treated to this gorgeous scene. Consider it a daily dose of nature’s love. Kristi Rugg, National Park Service
 It’s another stunning sunrise over Acadia in Maine. People have been drawn to the rugged coast of Maine throughout history. Awed by its beauty and diversity, early 20th-century visionaries donated the land that became Acadia National Park. The park is home to many plants and animals, and the tallest mountain on the U.S. Atlantic coast. Kristi Rugg, National Park Service
 Tall trees and rolling mountains reflect in the still waters of Jordan Pond in Acadia National Park in Maine. Lakes and ponds add shimmering contrast to Acadia's forested and rocky landscape. Within or adjacent to the park, you can explore 14 great ponds and 10 smaller ponds. Kristopher Schoenleber, www.sharetheexperience.org
 This little ball of fluff is a Mexican spotted owlet. Mexican spotted owls have been listed as federally threatened and endangered since 1993 because of deforestation and habitat degradation. However, this skillful hunter has found sanctuary among Zion's canyons. National Park Service
 Far from urban sprawl, Zion National Park in Utah gets little light pollution and allows visitors to see bright stars in an exceptionally dark sky. The Milky Way glowing over the sandstone formations will have you gasping at the beauty above and below. David Mills, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Sunlight streams through a grove of giant sequoias at Sequoia National Park in California. These massive trees are only found on the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada and can live for 3,000 years. Their impressive size and unique beauty never fail to amaze. Christina Vallianos, www.sharetheexperience.org
 As autumn arrives each year, acorn woodpeckers in the foothills begin harvesting acorns. The birds create holes in trees to store their bounty. Trees used by woodpeckers for storage are called granary trees, and may have up to 50,000 holes, each filled with an acorn, like this one at Sequoia National Park. National Park Service
 Visit Arches National Park in Utah and discover a landscape of contrasting colors, landforms and textures unlike any other in the world. This red rock wonderland will amaze you with its formations, refresh you with its trails, and inspire you with its sunsets. Benjamin Volker, www.sharetheexperience.org
 The massive sandstone monoliths along Park Avenue Trail at Arches National Park have imaginative and descriptive names. You won’t regret this easy one-mile hike. Where else can you walk in the shadows of the Tower of Babel, the Organ, the Three Gossips and Sheep Rock? Bud Walley, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Along with cacti and sand dunes, reptiles are icons of the desert. If you visit Arches National Park during the summer, you are sure to see lots of lizards. After birds, reptiles are the most active animals once daytime temperatures go above 90 degrees. They are usually visible sunbathing on rocks or chasing insects with their lightning-quick reflexes. Pictured here is a colorful western collared lizard. Casey Hodnett, National Park Service
 The Fiery Furnace in Arches National Park is a natural labyrinth of narrow passages between towering sandstone walls. Because of the challenging terrain of the Fiery Furnace, visitors must accompany a ranger-guided tour or obtain a hiking permit at the visitor center. While it may be a difficult hike, the amazing scenery is well worth the effort. Chris Wonderly, National Park Service
 Standing 65 feet tall, Delicate Arch is the most famous sandstone formation in Arches National Park. Referred to simply as "the arch" by many newly arriving visitors, Delicate has an allure that is hard to explain but impossible to deny. David Long, www.sharetheexperience.org
 Although the captivation of the Everglades National Park has mostly stemmed from its unique ecosystem, an alluring human story is deeply interwoven with its endless marshes, dense mangroves, towering palms and tropical fauna. Various groups and people navigated through the watery landscape to make it home. Today, the most common human interactions are taking pictures and making memories. G. Gardner, National Park Service
 Once common throughout the southeastern United States, fewer than 100 Florida panthers are estimated to live in Everglades National Park today. Perceived as a threat to humans, livestock and game animals, the species was nearly extinct by the mid-1950s. Today, the primary threats to the remaining panther population are habitat loss, fragmentation and degradation. National Park Service
 Surrounded by twisted, spiky trees straight out of a Dr. Seuss book, you might begin to question your map. Where are we anyway? Don’t worry, you’re in Joshua Tree National Park and about to have a wonderful adventure. Manish Mamtani, www.sharetheexperience.org
 The night sky is a glittering dome peppered with stars, planets, and passing meteors -- but most people no longer get to see it. In urban and suburban settings, artificial lighting and atmospheric pollutants wash out the light of the stars. Boasting some of the darkest nights in Southern California, Joshua Tree National Park offers many visitors the chance to admire the Milky Way for the first time in their lives. Manish Mamtani, www.sharetheexperience.org
 It’s rare enough to see one bighorn sheep, let alone five posing against the perfect backdrop of a dreamy pastel sunset! This amazing photo of Joshua Tree National Park in California by Koustubh Kulkarni won second place in the Share the Experience photo contest. Of the experience, Kulkarni says: “My wife first spotted the bighorn sheep in distance. The magnificent backdrop was just perfect and in this picture it almost looks like the sheep stopped to pose for us.” Koustubh Kulkarni (www.sharetheexperience.org
