Legendary crooner Andy Williams dies at 84
Sad news to report from the music world: Legendary singer Andy Williams died Tuesday night.
His spokesman tells Lifeline Live that Williams died after a year-long battle with bladder cancer. He was 84.
Williams, who was one of the most popular vocalists of the 1960s as well as an avid golfer, died at home in Branson, Mo., where he owns the Moon River Theatre. Moon River -- by Johnny Mercer and Henry Mancini -- was one of Williams' signature songs. On Twitter, fans are saying farewell to our "huckleberry friend."
"The old cliche says that if you can remember the 1960s, you weren't there," the singer once recalled. "Well, I was there all right, but my memory of them is blurred -- not by any drugs I took but by the relentless pace of the schedule I set myself."
Said Kathie Lee Gifford on Today this morning: "He had perhaps the most beautiful male voice ever. Perfect pitch."
Williams was also well-known in the 1970s and '80s for his Christmas television specials. Known for his affable, easygoing personality, he hosted the Grammys, the Golden Globes and the People's Choice Awards numerous times.
The crooner is survived by his wife, Debbie, and his three children, Robert, Noelle and Christian. Williams had the children with French-born dancer Claudine Longet. They divorced in 1975, and the following year she was charged with fatally shooting her boyfriend, alpine ski racer Spider Sabich, in Aspen. Williams made headlines as he stood by her side throughout the public trial. He married Debbie Meyer in 1991.
In lieu of flowers, the family asks that donations be made to the Bladder Cancer Advocacy Network.
UPDATE, 1:30 p.m. ET: Neil Portnow, president and CEO of The Recording Academy remembered Williams in a statement: "Andy Williams' smooth voice and casual style turned the songs he sang into timeless classics and made him one of America's top pop singers. As host of his own weekly variety series, The Andy Williams Show, he helped put both established and emerging talent in front of American audiences. Williams was the first host of the live Grammy Awards telecast and hosted the show for seven consecutive years, beginning with the 13th Annual Grammy Awards in March 1971 at the Hollywood Palladium. The entertainment industry has lost a giant piece of its living history today, but Williams' legacy will forever be enshrined in the annals of music and television. Our deepest condolences go out to his family, friends, and all who will miss this American treasure."




Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/WyBnp3
