5 things you need to know Monday
Trump to meet with former Texas Gov. Rick Perry
A lot has changed since Donald Trump competed against Texas Gov. Rick Perry and more than a dozen other rivals for the GOP presidential nomination. On Monday, the president-elect will meet with Perry, who may have a spot in the Cabinet as head of the Agriculture or Veterans Affairs departments or the Pentagon. Perry is one of several high-profile visitors who have met with Trump over the past week, which includes 2012 presidential candidate Mitt Romney, former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. Also on Monday, Trump is expected to announce his economic landing teams.
CLOSE

 Mitt Romney, former Republican presidential nominee, is under “active consideration” for secretary of state, Vice President-elect Mike Pence said in an appearance on Fox News Sunday. Time
Monday Night Football heads to Mexico
Corrections & clarifications: An earlier version of this item misstated a description Donald Trump used when referring to Mexicans migrating to the U.S. He called them rapists.
The Oakland Raiders and Houston Texans will head south of the border as Monday Night Football marks the NFL’s regular-season return to Mexico after a break of more than a decade. The game between the Houston Texans and Oakland Raiders, part of the NFL’s international series, won’t be typical, however. Conflicted feelings in Mexico about their neighbors to the north following the presidential campaign and the election of Donald Trump — who has called Mexicans migrating to the U.S. criminals and rapists — may cause fans to boo the national anthem. And there are concerns about how “devastating” the altitude and pollution surrounding Azteca Stadium could be for both teams.
CLOSE

 Mexico City is known for its severe pollution and high altitude. So should the NFL even consider the city for future expansion? USA TODAY Sports
Competency hearing set for Dylann Roof
Dylann Roof, the South Carolina man accused of killing nine people at a black church in June last year, is expected to have a competency hearing on Monday. Authorities say Roof, who is white, killed the black parishioners during a Bible study at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston. The trial started Nov. 7 with jury selection, but that was halted earlier this month after the federal judge overseeing the case determined the defendant must first undergo a competency evaluation. The district judge issued an order Wednesday closing the hearing, saying opening it could threaten Roof's right to a fair trial.
CLOSE

 USA TODAY Sports' Martin Rogers looks ahead to the Monday Night Football game in Mexico City on November 21st. USA TODAY Sports
Minnesota man to apologize for murdering one boy, assaulting another
A Minnesota man plans to express regret on Monday for the 1989 murder of Jacob Wetterling, an 11-year-old boy whose remains were found in August outside of Paynesville, Minn. Danny Heinrich confessed to killing Wetterling after kidnapping him at gunpoint as the boy biked home from a convenience store. Months earlier, he kidnapped and sexually assaulted 12-year-old Jared Scheierl. On Monday, Heinrich plans to say "how sorry he feels for the terrible crimes he has committed” when he’s sentenced in federal court on child porn charges, according to a filed court document. Heinrich lead investigators to Jacob’s remains as part of a plea deal on the child porn charges. According to the document, Heinrich doesn’t expect anyone to feel sympathy after his apology, "nor should they. He killed an innocent little boy.”
CLOSE

 According to Danny Heinrich's attorney, the Minnesota man plans to publicly apologize for murdering Jacob Wetterling and sexually assaulting Jared Scheierl. KARE
Victims seek to resume Marcos from Heroes' Cemetery
People whose rights were violated during the regime of Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos filed petitions Monday asking the Supreme Court to order the exhumation of his remains that were buried last week at the country’s Heroes’ Cemetery. They also want the court to hold his heirs and officials involved in contempt for carrying out the burial before the court heard final appeals against it. The secrecy-shrouded burial shocked democracy advocates and human rights victims, prompting street protests across Manila and in other cities. Marcos, whose rule was also marked by plunder, was ousted by a largely nonviolent army-backed uprising in 1986. At the height of the political turbulence, he flew to Hawaii, where he lived with his wife and children until he died in 1989.

And the essentials:
Stocks: Stocks were set to rise at the open Monday as oil prices pushed higher amid hopes of an upcoming production-cut deal from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
TV Tonight: Wondering what to watch tonight? TV critic Robert Bianco looks at Scorpion, Timeless and Soundbreaking: Stories from the Cutting Edge of Recorded Music.
Most popular: See our top stories in one nightly digest on Facebook Messenger.
If you missed the weekend's news, we've got you covered.
You can subscribe to get the day's top news each weekday in your inbox.
CONNECTTWEET 11 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2gcprwB
