Hawaii: We’re seeking solutions, not retribution
CLOSE

 A false alarm warning of a ballistic missile heading to Hawaii sent the islands into a panic. Hawaii officials apologized repeatedly, saying the alert was sent when someone hit the wrong button during a shift change. (Jan. 13) AP
I will not let an individual pay for a systemic problem: Opposing view

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 13 COMMENTEMAILMORE
The false alarm that shook Hawaii on Saturday stands as an example of a small error with very large effects. Let me be clear: There is no excuse for that incident, and I will make no attempt to avoid taking responsibility.
However, we need to be sure that in responding, we do not seek retribution where we should be identifying solutions. Looking at the nature and cause of the error that led to those events, the deeper problem is not that someone made a mistake; it is that we made it too easy for a simple mistake to have very serious consequences.
The system should have been more robust, and I will not let an individual pay for a systemic problem. That would be neither fair nor productive.
To demonstrate actual progress in addressing the problem, we must ensure that false alarms do not recur; institute processes that will allow us to respond to false alarms quickly; and reassure the public that the directives and warnings of the Hawaii Emergency Management Agency (HI-EMA) are accurate and reliable.
I want to be sure the public recognizes the outstanding work the HI-EMA staff provides to our community. We cannot let this single mistake overshadow their many years of commitment and service.
We have already taken steps to address the first two goals, instituting a two-person verification system before a missile alert can be sent, and creating the means and messages allowing us to issue a false-alarm message if one becomes necessary.
Moreover, we are commencing an internal investigation to ensure that we have fully reviewed Saturday’s events, mapped what happened and should have happened, and explored corrective action.
The result of this process will be a report to all stakeholders and a complete action plan ensuring both transparency and accountability. We also pledge our cooperation with any inquiry or investigation by any agency with an interest in our operations.
Vern Miyagi is administrator of the Hawaii Emergency Management Agency.
If you can't see this reader poll, please refresh your page.
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDIN 13 COMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2FHHCWH
