Pfizer rules on lethal injection drugs may limit death penalty executions
WASHINGTON -- The pharmaceutical giant Pfizer tightened its policies Friday regarding the use of drugs in lethal injections, a move experts said would make it harder for states to carry out executions.
Pfizer spokeswoman Rachel Hooper said the drug maker already did not allow its medicines to be used in lethal injections, but out of “due diligence" updated it’s global policy over compliance and controls.
"We strongly object to the use of any of our products in the lethal injection process for capital punishment," the company said in a statement. "We have implemented a comprehensive strategy and enhanced restricted distribution protocols for a select group of products to help combat their unauthorized use for capital punishment."
States with active death rows continue to execute prisoners using drugs obtained from state-regulated compounding pharmacies. The states either use pentobarbital or a three-drug cocktail that includes the controversial sedative midazolam, approved for continued use by the Supreme Court last June in a 5-4 ruling.

All states favor lethal injection as the most humane method, but the supply of drugs that can do the job has been drying up because of opposition to capital punishment in Europe, where many of the drugs are produced; federal regulations preventing the importation of drugs that don't meet U.S. standards; and recalcitrance by doctors and pharmacists who work to save lives, not end them.
Some drugs, such as sodium thiopental and pentobarbital, no longer can be obtained from European drug makers. That has sent states scurrying to compounding pharmacists, where the drugs they get are not subject to federal regulation.
The trade group for compounding pharmacies last year discouraged its members from "participating in the preparation, dispensing or distribution of compounded medications for use in legally authorized executions." A week later, the American Pharmacists Association called executions "fundamentally contrary to the role of pharmacists as providers of health care."
Pfizer's move adds to the opposition from U.S. manufacturers and puts renewed pressure on about a half dozen states that carry out executions on a regular basis.
“What Pfizer has done is made clear that they don’t want their medicine to be used in killing prisoners,” said Robert Dunham, executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center. “Their corporate mission to save lives and not to take lives.”
While this will make it far more difficult for states to carry out lethal injections, Dunham said they still may be able to obtain drugs through compounding pharmacies. Many states have passed laws imposing secrecy on the source of their lethal injection drugs.
During last year's Supreme Court case, five conservative justices said Oklahoma and other states could continue to use midazolam, in part because the prisoners had not identified a better alternative. Justice Sonia Sotomayor compared the drug cocktail to a chemical version of being burned at the stake. The dispute led two justices -- Stephen Breyer and Ruth Bader Ginsburg -- to suggest it was time to decide whether capital punishment no longer should be constitutional.
Midazolam was used in three 2014 executions in Oklahoma, Arizona and Ohio in which prisoners struggled, groaned or writhed in apparent pain during the administration of drugs used to paralyze them and stop their hearts. In 12 other executions, the drug cocktail did not cause obvious mishaps.

The difficulties involved in lethal injections are forcing states with capital punishment laws to rejuvenate backup methods once viewed as beyond the pale. Eight permit electrocution, three allow gas chambers, three allow hanging, and two would use firing squads – as Utah did in 2010 and 2013.
Seven states have abolished the death penalty since 2004, most recently Nebraska, where state legislators overrode Gov. Pete Ricketts' veto. Several other states have imposed moratoriums on lethal injections because of problems, notably Oklahoma and Ohio.
In Oklahoma, death-row inmates Richard Glossip, John Grant and Benjamin Cole – whose executions had been scheduled early last year – brought the lawsuit that led to June's high court ruling. Glossip, the lead plaintiff, was convicted of paying another man to kill the owner of the Oklahoma City budget motel where he worked as manager. He has long declared his innocence, and his execution has been continually delayed.
The number of executions in the U.S. peaked at 98 in 1999 and has dropped since then, hitting a low of 28 last year. Fourteen prisoners have been executed so far this year.
