Music news and gossip | Entertain This!
How #MeToo redefined Women’s March anthem ‘Quiet'
The singer talks with USA TODAY about her breakout hit and the transformative power of #MeToo.

T-Swift's 'End Game' video: Top Easter eggs
In the 'End Game' music video, directed by Joseph Kahn, Taylor Swift travels to Miami, Tokyo and London.

Want to feel old? These songs turn 10 in 2018
Want to feel old? These songs turn 10 in 2018

Bruno, Cardi B pay homage to 'In Living Color'
Bruno Mars has released a remix to 'Finesse' featuring Cardi B. The two have also made a 90s-tastic video.

Twitter wonders if Timberlake's gone country
The outdoorsy cover for 'Man of the Woods' has social media wondering if the sexy is ever coming back.

Ranked: The 50 biggest songs of 2017
USA TODAY looked at the biggest tracks released in 2017, by sales and streaming numbers, to see which have staying power.

Corden brings Christmas to 'Carpool Karaoke' lane
'Late Late Show' host recruited Harry Styles, Foo Fighters, Katy Perry, Ed Sheeran, Kelly Clarkson, Miley Cyrus for 'Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town.'

Chance The Rapper hilariously reports the weather
The rapper tested out his meteorologist skills on 'WGN Morning News' in Chicago Friday.

Demi Lovato marries in emotional 'Tell Me' video
After exchanging wedding rings during a beautifully decorated ceremony, a plot twist is thrown into the seemingly happily ever after.

JAY-Z talks infidelity, joint album with Beyoncé
The rapper also opened up about his relationship with Kanye West, his mom's sexuality and '4:44.'

Twitter is losing it over Ed Sheeran's Grammy snub
Twitter just can't decide whether 'Divide' was snubbed for album and record of the year or rightfully left out.

Rihanna puts celebrity muscle behind #FREECYNTOIABROWN
Who is Cyntoia Brown? The 16-year-old victim of sex trafficking from Nashville killed a client a decade ago.

Team JHud sings soulful 'Let It Be' on 'The Voice'
Blake Shelton also joined his team for a cover of Hank Williams Jr.'s 'If It Will, It Will.'

Entertainer David Cassidy: April 12, 1950 - Nov. 21, 2017
Entertainer David Cassidy: April 12, 1950 - Nov. 21, 2017

Did Pink grimace during Aguilera’s AMAs set?
Pink was sitting in the audience watching Christina Aguilera tribute to Whitney Houston when the camera panned to her pained expression.

'Rock in Peace': Twitter reacts to death of AC/DC's Malcolm Young
AC/DC's co-founder and guitarist Malcolm Young died Saturday at age 64. Here's how the music world is reacting to the news.

'Voice' playoffs kick off with comeback artists
Comeback artist Natalie Stovall brought her fiddle to up her performance, and Lucas Holliday was sent home.

Beyoncé returns on Eminem's 'Walk on Water'
The two stars teamed up for the rapper's new single.

Taylor Swift 'Reputation': What critics are saying
Swift's highly-anticipated new album dropped Friday.

Taylor Swift's 'Reputation': All the gossip
Taylor Swift spends most of 'Reputation' singing the praises of her current boyfriend, but still takes time to address West and Hiddleston.

Country stars shine on BMI Awards red carpet
Country stars shine on BMI Awards red carpet

It's Taylor vs. Taylor in '…Ready For It?’ vid
Taylor Swift has dropped the music video for '…Ready For It?,' a single from her upcoming album 'Reputation.'

Camila Cabello's 'Havana' music video is here
The Cuban-American singer brought some humor (and heat) to her 'Havana' music video.

Justin Timberlake owes Janet Jackson an apology
Timberlake is confirmed to perform at the 2018 Super Bowl halftime show. Here's why he owes Jackson an apology.

10 theories why Bieber got a full-stomach tattoo
We discuss the pressing question: Why? (Also, we have a few theories.)

Taylor Swift's 'Gorgeous': Her best new song yet
In a trio of Instagram posts Thursday, Taylor Swift announced the arrival of 'Gorgeous,' the third new song from her forthcoming album 'Reputation.'

Pink sings #FallSongs on 'The Tonight Show'
She even sang a reader-revised version of 'Just Give Me a Reason': "Just give me fall season / Just a little bit of fun."

'Carpool Karaoke': Watch Linkin Park's episode
The episode was taped 6 days before Bennington's suicide in July.

The 2017 American Music Awards nominees
The Chainsmokers, Drake, Kendrick Lamar, Ed Sheeran and The Weeknd earned five nods each.

Watch the trailer for Demi Lovato's documentary
"I went on like a bender of like two months where I was using daily," she reveals in the trailer.

Lin-Manuel Miranda on Puerto Rico, Trump
The 'Hamilton' scribe is rolling out 'Almost Like Praying,' a track to raise funds for Puerto Rico featuring Latinx artists.

Exclusive: 'Moana' fans can duet with The Rock on Smule app
To Disney lovers, we say 'You're Welcome.'

Want to remember Tom Petty? Donate to the Red Cross, his family says
Tribute to your favorite musician can help tackle problems.

Tom Petty through the years
Tom Petty through the years

Macklemore, Kesha take us to the 'Good Old Days'
In the video, we watch as Macklemore and Kesha meet up with friends at a cool, secluded campsite, giving us vintage vibes and nostalgia.

5 major reveals from Gaga's new documentary
In Toronto, the pop star revealed her intimate new documentary, which covers her love life, her pain and her Super Bowl performance.

Lady Gaga on fame: 'Not all it's cracked up to be'
The pop star penned an honest letter to fans on the eve of her documentary airing on Netflix.

This is how Britney Spears and Mariah Carey met
Hint: food was involved.

Sam Smith's 'Too Good At Goodbyes' video is here
The Stay With Me' singer's 'Too Good At Goodbyes' video released Monday is an emotional look at love and heartbreak.

Juggalo March: The funniest and most woke signs
"You know we're #MAGA when the #JuggaloMarch is the least embarrassing thing to happen to America in 6 months," one person mused on Twitter.

Country star Troy Gentry's career in photos
Country star Troy Gentry's career in photos

Sam Smith returns with 'Too Good At Goodbyes'
Out Friday, 'Too Good At Goodbyes' is the British crooner's first new song since 2015’s 'Writing’s On The Wall,' his James Bond theme from 'Spectre.'

Watch Swift fight Samberg, eat raw cookie dough
The old Taylor Swift is alive and well in new behind-the-scenes video. (And there's a cameo by her cat, Olivia Benson.)

Kelly Clarkson's 'Love So Soft' video is here
Clarkson's video for 'Love So Soft,' released Thursday, is a CGI-enhanced dream world, which matches well with vibes of the jazzy-pop/R&B track.

Zayn tricks the cops in his 'Dusk Till Dawn' video
Zayn plays a cool and collected bad boy in his music video for 'Dusk Till Dawn' released Thursday — and 'Girls' actress Jemima Kirke is his sidekick.

Hear new George Michael single 'Fantasy'
1980s track 'Fantasy' got modern makeover from producer Nile Rodgers and will appear on reissued 'Listen Without Prejudice/MTV Unplugged' on Oct. 20.

Demi Lovato on DACA: 'We should be helping'
Following the Trump administration's decision to wind down the DACA program, Lovato told USA TODAY how fans can make their voices heard.

Halsey is on the run in 'Bad At Love' music video
Halsey is back with another track off her sophomore album 'Hopeless Fountain Kingdom' — and this time, it came with a music video.

Todrick Hall on dancing in Taylor Swift's video
YouTube star Todrick Hall spoke to 'INSTANT' Tuesday to spill on his experience dancing in Swift's record-breaking 'Look What You Made Me Do' video.

Taylor Swift's 'Look' video is exceedingly petty
Less than two weeks into her 'Reputation' era, Taylor Swift has never been more exhausting.

Adam Levine blasts 'utterly horrible' VMAs
The singer was not impressed with the award show Sunday, calling it out on social media.

Things got emotional with Logic's VMAs performance
Alessia Cara and Khalid were also there to help share the message of suicide prevention.

VMAs: Linkin Park remembers Chester Bennington
Before the band took the stage to perform 'The Catalyst,' Leto got emotional in a heartfelt commemoration speech about the late frontman.

These transgender service members rocked the VMAs
The transgender service members who attended sent a timely message after Trump's recent order to ban transgender people from serving in the military.
