5 things to binge-watch over the long weekend
If you're curling up on the couch over MLK Day weekend, here are five TV show and movie recommendations.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

A long weekend means extra time to catch up on your TV shows. 
If you're spending some time inside with your TV over this weekend and Martin Luther King Jr. Day, we have five movies and TV shows for you that are worth your time, whether you're looking for something specifically about the civil rights activist, or a new series your friends will be talking about next week. 
If you want something about Martin Luther King Jr.: Selma
Director Ava DuVernay's 2014 chronicle of the Selma-to-Montgomery march is a moving, beautiful film that was snubbed at the Oscars but has culturally endured. David Oyelowo gives a striking performance as King, and the film's cast is rounded out by Carmen Ejogo as Coretta Scott King and recent Cecil B. DeMille award recipient Oprah Winfrey as Annie Lee Cooper. 
If you're paying attention to the Oscars race: Mudbound
Although it takes place a bit before King's era, director Dee Rees' Mudbound looks at how two World War II veterans — one black and one white — readjust to life in rural Mississippi, dealing with their own traumas. The film may make waves at the Oscars this year, especially for Mary J. Blige's performance, which has received critical raves. It's also one of the few movies in the Oscars conversation currently available to stream. 
Stream it on Netflix. 
If you like nihilism: The End of the F***ing World
The new Netflix series is one of the weirdest they've ever offered. James (Alex Lawther) is a self-described psychopath who runs away with Alyssa (Jessica Barden) because he thinks she could be his first human victim. (He's already killed animals.) Alyssa, meanwhile, is loud and potty-mouthed, hiding the insecurity and self-conscious side of herself. Their chemistry works well, and it's one of the most surprisingly delightful series you'll watch all year. And it's only January. 
Stream it on Netflix. 
If you like sweet romance more: Lovesick
This darling British import is one of the best romantic comedies around, and it just debuted its third season on Netflix. Lovesick, which changed its name from the ill-advised Scrotal Recall, is about a man who discovers he has a sexually transmitted disease and has to tell his former partners, which the series depicts with a flashback to one woman each episode. The pieces of the puzzle (one man's romantic life) come together in the wrong order, but it's an illuminating trip. 
Stream it on Netflix.
If you miss the 2000s: Lost
We have to go back. The sci-fi series sent fans into tizzies during its 2004-10 run, and all six seasons are available to stream on Hulu. Lost was a phenomenon when it first hit the air, and more than 10 years later it still holds up, a complex story that may not have had the best ending, but was incredibly enjoyable along the way. 
Stream it on Hulu. 
CLOSE

 Just in time for Valentine’s Day, Netflix is adding some new titles for your chill watchlist in February. Time



Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2mrTDGY
