Vienna has a coffee culture of its own
Daniel Moser is on the site of the city's first coffeehouse, dating to 1685. It remains a popular and always crowded, but comfortable, destination three blocks from St. Stephen's Cathedral. Jake Emen, for USA TODAY
 A "melange" is one of the more common coffee orders in Vienna. It consists of a slightly lengthened espresso with a light topping of foamed milk. Bräunerhof serves coffee the traditional way, on a silver platter with a small glass of water and sugar cubes on the side. Jake Emen, for USA TODAY
 Café Hawelka opened in 1939 and “still looks like it did in the '30s,” Brauner says. The family-run café is known as an artist's haunt, with art on the walls that was accepted as payment from formerly destitute artists, in kind. Hawelka is famous for its traditional Buchteln pastries. Jake Emen, for USA TODAY
 Leschanz is known as the “Viennese chocolate king” and is one of the most popular chocolatiers in the city. It was opened by a former employee of Demel, the city's most famous historical chocolatier. (Note it's closed on Sundays.) Jake Emen, for USA TODAY
 The Leschanz store has been open since 2004, but the storefront has a history dating back to the 1800s, when it was a button shop. The owners pay homage to that with an assortment of chocolate buttons. Jake Emen, for USA TODAY
 Demel is a pastry shop and chocolatier nearly as old as the USA, opened in 1786. The shop still carries a royal warrant of appointment originally issued from the Austro-Hungarian empire. Demel has been at its current location since 1888. Jake Emen, for USA TODAY
Last SlideNext Slide

The joke in many American cities is that you can step outside and see two or three Starbucks on the same block. In Vienna, it's a bit different. With at least 1,000 coffeehouses in the city — Vienna Tourism says there are “in excess of 960,” while other unofficial estimates are closer to 2,500 — coffee is truly ubiquitous. You can literally hop from coffeehouse to coffeehouse down and across entire sections of the city, one after another, after another.
Vienna may not be the first city to adopt the coffeehouse, but its citizens embrace the concept fully and have made it their own. “What we have here with coffeehouses in Vienna is very unique,” says Alexandra Brauner, a local guide and art historian.
The first Vienna coffeehouse dates to 1685, and the same site is still open and popular today, known as Café Daniel Moser. The café tells the tale of Austro-Armenian spy Johannes Diodato, who received permission to serve Turkish “chava” by Emperor Leopold I as a reward of sorts for his successful espionage work during the second Turkish siege of the city.
At the Viennese coffeehouse, the coffee may be the de facto reason for showing up, but in truth, it's more of an experience and lifestyle. “It's a second living room to us,” Brauner explains. “Nobody will bother you if you stay all day and have one coffee.”
Coffeehouses offer newspapers and magazines to read at your leisure, seating is often spacious and comfortable, and friends gather to simply chat the hours away. Unofficial codes of conduct have been developed over the centuries and vary from one coffeehouse to the next, passed down at the “stammtisch,” the regulars' table.
An American traveler may find the service isn't quite rapid — but that's the point. “Still today, you should not be in a hurry in a coffeehouse,” Brauner says. “Vienna is not a hectic city, that's what makes it so charming.”
Sit down, relax and soak up the atmosphere. Viennese coffeehouse culture was added to the UNESCO intangible cultural heritage list in 2011. In addition to the traditional, visitors will find a new wave of modern coffeehouses, which would fit in equally as well in Brooklyn or Seattle.
Mastering the dozens of ways to order is key to your time at a Viennese coffeehouse. On the whole, Viennese coffee is known for a medium roast, but acquiring a cup is not as simple as asking for a “coffee.” It's not unusual for coffeehouses to list anywhere from 20 to 40 or more variations of the drink, often with slight differences in terms of ratios of espresso to milk or froth, or presentation. Each has its own tongue-twisting name, whether it's a Verlängerter Schwarzer, espresso in a large cup lengthened with hot water, or an Überstürzter Neumann aka upside down, an espresso in a little pot, which is poured over a cup of thick whipped cream.
What goes best with dozens of variations of coffee? All the sweets you can handle, of course. Whether it's a pastry served side by side with your beverage, or a stop into one of the city's many high-end chocolatiers, any sweet tooth will be properly satiated in Vienna.
As with coffeehouses, some have hundreds of years of history, while others are newer to the scene. For the former, there's Demel, opened in 1786, and for the latter, there are trendy shops such as Xocolat, open since 2011. “In our own products, we like to make fine chocolates without any preservatives,” says Xocolat owner Ramona Mahr. “Basic ingredients are good!”
Browse the photos above for a virtual tour of standout coffeehouses and chocolate destinations, and see more coffee travel inspiration below. Book a customized Vienna tour based on your interests, such as coffee and chocolate, with Alexa Brauner, or consider signing up for a hands-on coffee seminar at the Vienna School of Coffee.
