Australian Open: Angelique Kerber cruises to victory against Maria Sharapova
MELBOURNE, Australia – Much to the disappointment of fans, the match between Angelique Kerber and Maria Sharapova didn’t materialize as a classic at the Australian Open on Saturday night.
In a little more than an hour, Kerber had knocked down Sharapova 6-1, 6-3, leaving the Russian with still more work to do to return to the form that delivered five career Grand Slam trophies.
“I was trying starting from the first point to being aggressive, but also staying really focused on my game, playing every single point,” said Kerber, who is now 4-4 in her career Sharapova. “I know Maria is always fighting. After the first set, I was trying to not thinking about the score, just going for it, trying to being aggressive and playing actually my game.
“And it works,” she added. “It works from the beginning. Yeah, I'm happy about how I played tonight.”
Ahead of the third-round meeting with Kerber, the 48th-ranked Sharapova indicated she welcomed tough matches as a yardstick for where her game currently stands.
“I think there are a lot of things that I need to get better at and improve on,” Sharapova said. “But looking at the overall picture, the overall beginning of this year, finishing the tournament, first thing is that I'm healthy.
“As I said, this is a process,” she added. “It's a lot of things that take time. To be able to get these matches, players that are playing this well, I'm going to face a lot of them this year. I'll have to bring it. Today was not enough.”
Sharapova is not yet back on tour for a year after serving a 15-month anti-doping suspension that ended last April. She tested positive for the banned substance Meldonium during the 2016 Australian Open.
In contrast to Sharapova, the 21st-seeded Kerber appears back to playing the type of tennis that led her to her first two Grand Slam titles at the 2016 Australian and U.S. Opens, and also found her in the Wimbledon final that year. She defeated Serena Williams in Australia, lost to Williams at Wimbledon and downed Karolina Pliskova in New York.
When Kerber won here two years ago she became the first German to win a Grand Slam title since Steffi Graf won the last of her 22 major trophies at the 1999 French Open.
Kerber’s already had a busy start to the 2018 season only three weeks into the new year. Along with Alexander Zverev, she helped Germany to the final at the Hopman Cup team competition in Perth, losing out on the trophy to the Swiss team of Roger Federer and Belinda Bencic.
From Perth she traveled to Sydney where she won her first title since winning the 2017 U.S. Open, defeating Australia’s Ashleigh Barty in the final.
The difference between the two was that Kerber kept her errors to a minimum, posting only seven to Sharapova’s 26 in the encounter. While Sharapova successfully broke Kerber’s serve on one of four opportunities, in the second game of the second set, Kerber took advantage of five of eight service break chances.
“I think she played extremely well,” Sharapova said. “She was the more aggressive player. She took a lot more risk than I did.
“She's a confident player at the moment,” she added. “A lot of things were going her way throughout the match. The one little opportunity I had in the second set, I didn't take, I made an error. Sometimes that's all it takes.”
Kerber, who celebrated her 30th birthday two days ago at a seafood restaurant at the St. Kilda beach neighborhood, will play the winner of the the match between 26th-ranked Agnieszka Radwanska of Poland and Hsieh Su-Wei of Taipei in the fourth-round.
PHOTOS: Best of the Australian Open

 Roger Federer celebrates after defeating Marton Fucsovics in their fourth round match. Dita Alangkara, AP
