'This is bigger than Larry Nassar': Aly Raisman, other victims discuss abuse
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: USA TODAY Sports' Nancy Armour believes the court system served justice with Nassar's sentencing of up to 175 years in prison, however, there are many lessons still needed to be learned from this nightmare of a story. USA TODAY Sports

In the wake of former USA Gymnastics doctor Larry Nassar's sentence of 40 to 175 years in prison, which was preceded by 156 victim-impact statements over seven days, several of Nassar's victims shared their feelings about the sentence on Thursday morning TV shows.
Olympic gold medalist Aly Raisman, who last week read a blistering statement to Nassar, appeared on TODAY. She said she operated with tunnel vision -- similar to her gymnastics meets -- before delivering her statement. Raisman said Nassar "looked at me the whole entire time. It was crazy." 
But Raisman struggled to believe justice was fully served. 
"It's not something where you feel instantly better," she said. "We need to hold these organizations accountable — USA Gymnastics, the USOC, Michigan State — this is bigger than Larry Nassar. We have to get to the bottom of how this disaster happened." 
Watch @hodakotb's full interview with @Aly_Raismanpic.twitter.com/aW842kDTPv
— TODAY (@TODAYshow) January 25, 2018
Former gymnast Rachael Denhollander, the first to publicly accuse Nassar of sexual abuse, shared her reaction on Megyn Kelly TODAY. 
"I cried," she said. "To be able to put the shame and blame back where it belongs — on the abuser — is an incredibly powerful thing to witness. It was also devastating to witness."
She also called out USA Gymnastics. "If you have to pay a private investigator to come in and tell you you need to report the sexual assault of a child, you have no business being on that board." 
“When you witness that level of damage and know that it did not have to happen, that is heartbreaking” - Rachael Denhollander #MegynTODAYpic.twitter.com/sOXaTnVhqB
— Megyn Kelly TODAY (@MegynTODAY) January 25, 2018
Kyle Stephens, the first woman to read a statement in the sentencing, discussed how Nassar played a role in her father's eventual suicide. 
Nassar "started abusing me when I was 6," Stephens said. 
“He tore us apart” - Kyle Stephens #MegynTODAYpic.twitter.com/klY52f17CB
— Megyn Kelly TODAY (@MegynTODAY) January 25, 2018
In the same segment on Megyn TODAY, former gymnast Mattie Larson described how she once hurt herself — what she considered a "victory" — so she didn't have to face Nassar for medical treatment. She described herself as "a shell of a child" with "no way out.
"He made me almost give up hope," she said.
WATCH: “Is it true you injured yourself to avoid going to see him?” #MegynTODAYpic.twitter.com/cQQOqtxXD0
— Megyn Kelly TODAY (@MegynTODAY) January 25, 2018
