Univ. of Wisconsin-Superior Black Student Union honors police chief with kente cloth
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 

University of Wisconsin-Superior Black Student Union treasurer Ali Maamoun shakes Police Chief Nick Alexander’s hand after the kente gifting ceremony. (Photo: Ivy Vainio)
The Black Student Union at the University of Wisconsin-Superior honored the local police chief, Nicholas Alexander, for his work with black students by presenting him with a traditional African scarf last week.
Chief Alexander has been involved with the Black Student Union (BSU) for the last two years, attending numerous BSU meetings, events and diversity trainings.
While students initially wanted Chief Alexander to attend their graduation, when they learned he couldn’t because of a time conflict, they organized their own ceremony for him — presenting him with a traditional African kente scarf.
“This cultural symbol should be a reminder to you, and all who view it, that you have gained the utmost respect and honor of our Black Student Union members,” members of the BSU wrote to Chief Alexander in a letter of recognition. “Thank you for honoring us with your support over the years. We are grateful.”
Chantele Nelson, vice president of the BSU, told USA TODAY College that she and her friends in the group appreciate the ongoing relationship between the police chief and the BSU.
In the wake of many high-profile confrontations between black men and white police officers, the BSU held an event called “Police Interactions: It’s Time We Talked,” in January 2015. That was the first time the BSU invited Chief Alexander to campus. While Chief Alexander could not attend the very first meeting, he sent other officers from the local police force to attend.
That discussion opened up the door for an ongoing relationship between the students and the local police department.
Since then, Chief Alexander and his officers have attended numerous BSU meetings as well as its annual soul food dinner, and have even participated in diversity trainings held at the school.
The relationship benefited not just the students, but the police department as well.
Last week, the Superior police department swore in Ronald Robinson, the first-ever African American officer in the department’s 133-year history.
 The first Black police officer of Superior, Wisconsin is sworn in: https://t.co/pA6cMQFS58 pic.twitter.com/3CtA51303V
 — The Root (@TheRoot) May 22, 2017
Chief Alexander said his relationship with the BSU was one of the motivating forces behind his desire to increase diversity within the department — and BSU members even attended the historic swearing-in ceremony.
Nelson says she believes the partnership between the BSU and Chief Alexander is “leading the way in helping to solve police-community relationships” and that the partnership has given many black students a sense of “security.”
“Joining forces promotes commitment to serving all citizens in an equal and respectful way,” Nelson told USA TODAY College.
Another local police chief, Ron Tinsley from neighboring Duluth, has shown commitment to students as well.
When the BSU’s treasurer Ali Maamoun realized their annual “Final Friday” event was in jeopardy because of a budget shortfall, Maamoun reached out to the police chiefs on a whim to see if they could help.
Fortunately, they could. “Both police departments worked together to secure us sponsors from local businesses,” said Maamoun. “Final Friday” went forward, he said, drawing over 300 people to learn about African culture and sample African food.
“The police officers have very busy schedules, and for them to take the time to help us by volunteering their time and energy is very impressive and inspiring,” said Maamoun.
BSU adviser Ivy Vainio, who works in the school’s Office of Multicultural Affairs, said she is proud of the students’ efforts. “For them to come up with this idea, and to go through with it, it’s really impactful,” Vainio told USA TODAY College.
The kente cloth Chief Alexander was honored with at the ceremony was made by the family of Professor Ephraim Nikoi, another BSU adviser.

Superior Police Chief Nick Alexander (center) with Univ. of Wisconsin-Superior Black Student Union members (from left) Augustine Ngo Bitjong, Silene John, Maryelle Nyeck and Opeyemi Omiwale after the ceremony. (Photo: Ivy Vainio)
Nikoi explained the traditional cloth’s significance. “Kente is a handwoven traditional cloth mostly found in Ghana and some parts of West Africa,” he said. “It is an important cloth that is worn for special occasions.”
Graduating members of the BSU receive kentes when they graduate to honor their achievements. Everyone involved in the BSU that USA TODAY College talked to noted that it is rare for a non-black person to be honored with a kente.
In fact, this is the first time the BSU at University of Wisconsin-Superior has given a kente to someone outside the organization, according to Vainio.
Chief Alexander told USA TODAY College that the ceremony was “very humbling.” And he shared the credit. “This [partnership] is not just something I’ve done alone, it’s not just me at the police department. There are many other police officers, too.”
When asked if he planned to continue working with the BSU, he cheerily crowed, “You bet!”
Toni Airaksinen is a member of the USA TODAY College contributor network.
This article comes from The USA TODAY College Contributor network. The views expressed in this article do not necessarily reflect the views of USA TODAY.
