Obama sends optimistic economic report to Congress
WASHINGTON — President Obama delivered an annual economic report to Congress Monday that was bullish on growth and employment projections but also cautioned that structural changes in the economy will continue to put pressure on the middle class.
The report predicts the economy to grow 2.7% in 2016 and 2.5% in 2017, with an an unemployment rate of 4.7% in 2016 and 4.5% in 2017.
"Claims that America’s economy is in decline or that we haven’t made progress are simply not true," Obama said in the Economic Report of the President, echoing a complaint he's made about criticism about the economy from Republican presidential candidates. "What is true — and the reason that a lot of Americans feel anxious — is that the economy has been changing in profound ways, starting long before the Great Recession."
Those changes are technological, global and demographic, the report said.
"Today, technology doesn’t just replace jobs on the assembly line, but rather affects any job where work can be automated," Obama said. "Companies in a global economy face tougher competition from abroad, and they can locate anywhere. As a result, workers have less leverage for a raise. And more and more wealth and income is concentrated at the very top."
Indeed, the body of the report includes 74 mentions of robots or robotics, concluding that more automation will replace low-skilled workers but increase wages for the workers who remain.
But the major long-term drag on growth is demographic, said Jason Furman, the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and the lead author of the report.
"The biggest difference is that population growth is slower," he said. "The baby boom has turned into a retirement boom."
With its scores of charts and tables, The Economic Report of the President is less of a policy document than a justification of the economic assumptions that underpin Obama's economic agenda. Delaying implementation of the 12-nation trade pact known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership by one year, it argues, would cost the U.S. economy $94 billion. It cites a Congressional Budget Office report that immigration reform would grow the economy by 3.3% over 10 years.

But the report also focuses on some lower-profile work of Obama's economic team, looking at the impact of occupational licensing laws and land use restrictions on a more efficient use of labor and capital in the market.
One of the few formal responsibilities of the Council of Economic Advisers, the Economic Report of the President was first required by Congress through the Employment Act of 1946, and comes within two weeks of the president's budget proposal. Though it's now one of hundreds of reports the president is required to submit to Congress — with copies required to be sent to all 50 governors — it still has some formal weight: The Joint Economic Committee of Congress is required by law to hold hearings on it.
"It explains the economics behind the president's agenda," Furman said, though he acknowledged, "There is no new policy here."
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1TAs4qZ
