GOP tax bill is just another way to repeal health care. Will coverage ever be safe?
CLOSE

 Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell complained about top Democrats backing out of White House meeting while Minority Leader Chuck Schumer called on President Trump to stop tweeting. (Nov. 28) AP
Republicans want to cut health spending to pay for tax cuts. It's an assault on the sick, old and low-income, and insurance would cost more for all.

CONNECTTWEET 12 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
It has been just two months since the Senate gave up on trying to pass a series of health care bills that Americans had soundly rejected in poll after poll. Yet the same Republican recipe for health care now is back on the table in the form of the lopsided tax bill that the Senate plans to vote on this week.
A lot of people get intimidated by the idea of trying to understand the tax bill. It’s a shame because, much like congressional budgets, tax bills reveal priorities.
And GOP priorities are easy to follow as they haven’t changed since the party failed to accomplish its three-part health care agenda: Cut the money going toward health care for low-income people, seniors and kids; use that money to cut taxes for people in the upper-income brackets; and end the federal protections that stopped discrimination against people with pre-existing conditions. Flip the order, and the tax bill looks the same.
Much like the earlier health bills, with their corporate tax breaks and breaks for the upper-income brackets, the dollars and cents of the House and Senate tax bills point to clear beneficiaries and losers. The beneficiaries? Corporations and wealthy individuals (particularly those who stand to inherit large estates), who get large permanent tax cuts. In 2025, the bill would give tax cuts averaging $360,000 to the top 0.1% of households.
And like the health care bills last summer, these tax cuts are paid for in large part with cuts to health care benefits — affecting people with private coverage, Medicare and Medicaid.
To start, an estimated $338 billion that is helping millions of working-class Americans pay for insurance is on the block to be cut. Republicans argue that these are people who are being compelled to buy health insurance and so neither they nor anyone else will be hurt. That’s simply untrue.
Yes, there is a requirement that Americans purchase health care or pay a penalty, and the Senate GOP proposes to remove it. And requiring people to do something is not wildly popular. But why does that requirement exist? Former Massachusetts governor and 2012 Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney put it this way in 2011: “It is fundamentally a conservative principle to insist that people take personal responsibility as opposed to turning to government for giving out free care.”
It’s also a good basic insurance principle — more people with insurance reduces everyone’s costs. The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office expects everyone’s insurance to cost 10% more if the Senate GOP is successful. 
The American Academy of Actuaries, an independent and just-the-facts body, says it's even worse than that. It predicts “severe market disruption and loss of coverage” as insurers stop offering coverage.
That’s not all. In the version of the tax bill passed this month by the House, Americans who have serious chronic conditions or pay for nursing home care or high-cost medications would lose the ability to deduct medical expenses. These are people with often crippling medical bills, nearly half with annual incomes under $50,000 and more than half of them 65 and older.
This assault on the sick fits with the executive order the president signed last month, which is designed to give insurance companies loopholes so they can exclude people with pre-existing conditions, adding an effective surcharge to policies that do cover people with pre-existing conditions.
POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media
To pave the way for this tax bill, Republicans passed a budget that over 10 years allows them to grow the debt by up to $1.5 trillion with just 50 votes in the Senate. And so far, most of the party's deficit hawks are suspiciously silent. There is a half-hearted set of GOP talking points claiming the economy will grow enough to offset those lost taxes, but 37 out of 38 economists recently surveyed disagreed.
More likely, the $1.5 trillion budget hole will be used to meet the objectives of the failed health care repeal bills — to make dramatic cuts to the Medicaid and Medicare programs. Conveniently forgetting it was their tax cuts for the wealthy that got us there, these same lawmakers will decry the manufactured fiscal crisis and bemoan that we can’t afford the cost of health care for our older and sicker citizens.
Many of these cuts will occur automatically. Under a 2010 pay-as-you-go law, Medicare will automatically face draconian cuts of $250 billion over 10 years. And three former Defense secretaries warned that the tax bill would endanger national security funding, which should make John McCain, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, think twice before signing on.
Tax cuts for the wealthy? Health care repeal? Call it what you will. For this Congress and White House, they are two sides of the same coin — gold on one side, lead on the other.
Andy Slavitt, a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors, is a former health care industry executive who ran the Affordable Care Act and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services from 2015 to 2017. Follow him on Twitter: @ASlavitt
 To respond to a column, submit a comment to letters@usatoday.com.
CONNECTTWEET 12 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2iYRAJD
