How Danica Patrick once tried to outsmart a cop to avoid getting pulled over
Warning: There is some NSFW language in the video.
 360 shares 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
 By: | January 17, 2018 4:58 pm  Follow @MMartinelli4  
Danica Patrick is a famously fast race car driver – it is her job for a little while longer – but she recently admitted she has a similar approach when she’s behind the wheel of a regular passenger car.
“I’m a very aggressive driver,” she explained on the Joe Rogan Experience podcast. “I have a large comfort zone, I say. People piss me off a lot, they’re horrible drivers. The only way that I can make sure I don’t get a speeding ticket is to not drive.”
Well, that isn’t always possible, and Patrick estimated she’s been pulled over at least 20 times in her life, including once when she was 16 years old and was stopped three times in three days.

(Marvin Gentry-USA TODAY Sports)
Back then, she says she drove a 1997 Mustang Cobra and considered it a cool car. But, as she explained, she didn’t exactly take it easy on it.
“My very first car, my Mustang Cobra, I drove it so hard that in 8,000 miles, I was on my third set of brakes,” Patrick told Rogan.
She also shared an entertaining story about getting pulled over, which she said was either the second or third time in that three-day span 19 years ago. And she almost got away.
Patrick said, via the Joe Rogan Experience (around the 2-hour, 12-minute mark):
“I was picking my girlfriend up and pulling off of her street onto the main street. And it was wet out, so I kind of got it going and kicked it sideways a little bit. And (I) looked in my rearview mirror at the stoplight, and there was a cop sitting there. Well, he comes for me, so I turn on the first road I can find. So I make a left, drive down the road. It’s a frickin’ dead end.
“So I pull into a driveway, and we slouch down real low, and the cop kind of drives around. And all of a sudden, somebody comes out from the house, and they’re like, ‘Can I help you?’ And I’m like, ‘Uh, what road is this out here?’ I mean, mind you, it’s the road I live off of. … So anyway, we’re like, ‘OK, thank you! Sure!’
“So we get back in the car, and the cop’s gone, so we back out and head back down the road again, trying to get further away from the stoplight. Make a left and I look over in the parking lot across the street – in the grade school parking lot. Cop’s sitting there. So, I make the first right I can then. So I turn right into a neighborhood, and I’m driving along, and he finally catches me. And I think I cried to help my situation.”
Patrick said she was just trying to see if she could get away.
