7 things to know about the Ohio 'heartbeat bill'
SHARE 
 TWEET 
 PIN 
 SMS 
 SEND 
 EMAIL 
Corrections and clarifications: This article has been updated to make clearer the process by which the bill could become law and go into effect, and to provide detail about Ohio’s viability law.
The so-called “heartbeat bill” was passed in Ohio Wednesday, banning abortions in that state any time after a fetus’ heartbeat can be detected. (About six weeks into a pregnancy.)
The bill will now pass to Republican Governor John Kasich, who is anti-abortion, to either sign into law or veto within 10 days. If he signs it and it takes effect, this would be the shortest window for abortions to be performed in the United States.
Whether you live in Ohio or not, here’s what you should know about this bill.

Will Ohio Governor John Kasich sign the heartbeat bill into law? (AP Photo/John Minchillo, File)
1. This law bans abortions by making them a crime
The law, formally known as House Bill 493 or HB493, would make it a fifth-degree felony for a physician to perform an abortion if the physician fails to check for a fetal heartbeat or performs an abortion when a heartbeat is clearly heard. This felony, according to The Columbus Dispatch, would be punishable by up to one year in prison and the physician could face a civil lawsuit from the mother as well as disciplinary action.
2. There are some exceptions
If there is a “serious risk of the substantial and irreversible impairment of a major bodily function of the pregnant woman,” abortions will be permitted under this bill. However, the bill doesn’t state any exception for pregnancies that result from incest or rape.
3. The ban would take effect before many women even know they’re pregnant
For many women, it takes a missed period — or even two — to realize they could be pregnant. That could place them about six to eight weeks into their pregnancies, which is too late to get an abortion under this bill.
Even if some women with unwanted pregnancies discover they are pregnant before the six weeks, they still might not be able to schedule an abortion for one of two major reasons: there are very few abortion clinics in Ohio — nine, currently — so women may have to wait for appointments, and state laws require women in Ohio to first have an informational meeting with a physician about the abortion — and then wait 24 hours after that appointment to have the actual procedure done.
4. There’s legal opposition to the bill
Some experts say this law is unconstitutional. Similar measures have already been struck by federal courts in two other states: North Dakota and Arkansas. And the Supreme Court has already ruled that “states cannot prohibit abortions unless a fetus is viable outside the womb, generally accepted as 24 weeks’ gestation,” as Cincinnati.com reported.
The ACLU of Ohio has publicly opposed the heartbeat bill, and it has shared that the ACLU will not sit by if it becomes a law.
 If @JohnKasich signs #HeartbeatBill, we'll sue. #20WeekBan may pass as early as tmrw. Both are unconstitutional & should veto. #StoptheBans
 — ACLU of Ohio (@acluohio) December 7, 2016
The ACLU of Ohio believes the bill is “is political interference in a woman’s most personal, private medical decisions,” according to its website.
5. Governor Kasich may not sign the heartbeat bill
The governor told CNN earlier this year that he is “pro-life with the exceptions of rape, incest and the life of the mother.” The heartbeat bill does not make any mention of the first two concerns.
Further, according to the Columbus Dispatch, Kasich has opposed the bill over the last two years due to constitutional concerns.
6. Ohio currently restricts the abortion of viable fetuses
Since 2011, Ohio does not allow abortion procedures to occur if the fetus is viable — meaning, able to survive outside the womb. By Ohio law, before performing an abortion on a fetus that is 20 weeks or more in gestation, the doctor must do a viability test. After viability has been reached, abortions may not be performed unless the pregnancy puts the woman’s life at risk or would cause her serious injury.
7. The Ohio bill is not the only current anti-abortion act
Following the victory of President-elect Donald Trump, new anti-abortion legislation has been appearing all around the United States. For example, a law has been proposed in Indiana that would ban and criminalize all forms of abortion in the state. The Indy Star reported that not only would all abortions be a crime under the proposed law, but also all those involved in the procedure could face charges.
So even if you don’t live in Ohio or know anyone there, keep an eye on this new slew of proposed abortion laws.
Christy Osler is a Boston University student and a USA TODAY College digital producer.
