'Reckless' Martina McBride returns to country roots
Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story had the wrong album title, and misstated the total figure of Martina McBride’s album sales.
NASHVILLE — It’s an April afternoon at Blackbird Studio in Berry Hill, one of the best recording facilities in this Nashville neighborhood. Assistants bustle in and out. People whisper into their phones. Audio techs move microphones around. In the center of it all is Martina McBride, diminutive but unmistakably the heartbeat of all this activity, studying email messages as her team whirls around her on its various missions.
This is country music as it should be: one of the genre’s greatest female vocalists according to many of her peers, in the center of the action as she has been since her recording debut 24 years and 18 million album sales ago.
McBride's latest release, Reckless, out Friday, brings her back to country music following her exploration of classic R&B on Everlasting in 2014.
“It’s been about five years since we made a country record,” she says, her phone set aside. “So I feel like I came back on Reckless with a fresh perspective. Specifically, my vision for this record was to have it be very roots-oriented. I was thinking about those old Creedence Clearwater and Van Morrison records, which were so intimate and organic. That’s where this one comes from.”
Two of Nashville’s most respected producers, Dann Huff and Nathan Chapman, joined forces on Reckless to achieve this goal. Their aesthetics combined to give the instrumental settings unusual dimension, from the sitar hook and Celtic drums on Everybody Wants to Be Loved to the stark solo piano accompaniment of You and You Alone.
“I actually started out choosing them separately,” McBride says. “I went to Nathan and said, ‘I want you to cut five songs on this record but I also want you to know I’m asking Dann to do five songs.’ He said, ‘I wish we could work together! Then when I went to Dann he said, ‘Can we at least do one song together?’ It worked out great because they have different strengths that complement each other. Dann is more methodical; Nathan is more willing to try anything. And I was in the middle, just saying how I wanted the songs to sound and what musicians I wanted to use.”
Despite her history of No. 1 singles, Gold and Platinum sales certifications and multiple awards from the Academy of Country Music and the Country Music Association, McBride, 49, knows that nothing comes easy these days, particularly for female singers in a genre already saturated with eager young contenders.
“It’s always been a challenge for women to get on country radio,” she says. “And I had a hard time finding songs for this record because there just isn’t a well full of songs for female artists. You have songwriters who stop writing for females because, frankly, they make their money by having their songs played on the radio, so why spend four hours writing a song for female artists when somebody tells you straight out it’s not going to be played on the radio? ... And you have female artists who are maybe recording songs that aren’t as great because they don’t have a lot of choices.”
She reflects for a moment. “But the fact is that females choose to record a certain kind of song. The woman’s point of view is unique. Country music — all music —​ needs that point of view to be complete. ”
Here is an exclusive first listen of It Ain't Pretty for USA TODAY.
CONNECTTWEET 3 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1SynSUi
