First Look: Zac Posen channels Betty Boop in new collection
CLOSE

 Designer Zac Posen, who's releasing two dresses inspired by Betty Boop, also co-stars with the animated star in a series of cartoons. The first one is called 'Betty Goes A-Posen.' 

Corrections and Clarifications: An earlier version of this story had the wrong price for the Zac Posen gown.
 More than 80 years ago, Betty Boop sang that no one could take away her "boop-oop-a-doop." And it's something she could keep singing today, as activists march and speak out on behalf of women's rights.
At least that's how Zac Posen sees it.
The fashion designer, who launched his namesake brand in 2001 and serves as creative director at Brooks Brothers and as a judge on Project Runway, has created a collection of Betty Boop-inspired dresses that “felt absolutely right for the moment we’re living in,” he says. The pieces will hit Posen's website on Feb. 14, priced at $250 for the flirty dress and $550 for the gown. The duo comes in one bold color: The official Pantone shade Betty Boop Red, which is perfect “for anyone who wants their inner-empowered Betty moment.”

“I didn’t go with the strapless (look from the cartoon), because I wanted them to be more age diverse and put my own spin on it,” Posen says.Another twist he added to the outfit: black netting with Boop-style kiss marks.

The final product is meant to capture the feel of the character who's "feminist, strong and sexy, but she owns her own sexuality,” says Posen, who grew up watching the Max Fleischer creation, and other cartoons his father recorded on VHS.
The sassy, doe-eyed cartoon is getting more than dresses this year: She got her own emoji, unveiled at the Emoji Museum in July. Cosmetics company Mac is releasing a Boop red lipstick shade, also on Feb. 14, and the sexy star will appear alongside an animated version of Posen in a series of cartoons, "Betty Goes A'Posen."
“It’s one of my career highlights,” Posen says about seeing a cartoon version of himself with wiggly limbs -- which may not be too far off from the real Posen's legs. “Sometimes, late at night on the set of Project Runway, I’ve been known to pop an interpretive dance."
