New book: If our democracy is dying, President Trump is not the only culprit
Democracies don't just die; people kill them. 
That's the conclusion of authors Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt in their carefully researched and persuasive new book, How Democracies Die (Crown, 320 pp., ★★★½ out of four). 
As tempting as it is for opponents of President Trump — whom the authors, Harvard University professors, call a "serial norm breaker" — to blame him for all of what ails the U.S. democracy, he is just one of many who have changed the traditions of our national political fabric.
Trump's authoritarian tendencies are well-documented, from his calls to root out rivals in the FBI and the so-called "Deep State" to his insistence that the Justice Department is his personal prosecutorial force. But Levitsky and Ziblatt argue that he is the just the latest in a long line of American politicians who have twisted and battered the system for their own gain.
"The process of norm erosion started decades ago — long before Trump descended an escalator to announce his presidential candidacy," they write.
At the root, they say, is racism, particularly racism inspired by passage of the 1965 Civil Rights Act, which empowered black Americans to vote. Couple that with the passage the same year of landmark immigration reform, which empowered non-white Americans and created an animus among white Americans that has triggered a series of moves to counter diversity and preserve white influence.
President Richard Nixon's so-called Southern strategy aimed at exploiting the anger white Southerners felt at changes in their states. That helped turn the South from a Democratic stronghold to a place where the statewide election of a Democrat, such as Sen. Doug Jones in Alabama, becomes a national story.

The authors deftly mine world history for other examples of how politicians have distorted their nations' less-robust democracies to enhance their own power. In Venezuela, former Army colonel Hugo Chavez used his support among the country's lower classes to propel himself into the presidency with huge legislative majorities. He used his advantage to strip away the opposition's ability to fight back, and with each step, Chavez eroded what remained of Venezuela's wobbly democratic traditions. 
Now, Venezuela is a basket case, an authoritarian state unable to feed its own people.
In nearby Peru, former President Alberto Fujimori used many of the same techniques to dominate his nation in the 1990s and into the following decade. Like Trump, Fujimori attacked uncooperative judges, calling them "jackals" and "scoundrels." By April 1992, he dissolved congress and the constitution. "Less than two years after his surprising election, the long-shot outsider had become a tyrant," Levitsky and Ziblatt write.
The United States is not Venezuela or Peru. Its judicial system is strong and independent, and enough people in both parties are firmly committed to the rule of law and democratic traditions. 
The authors show the fragility of even the best democracies and also caution politicians, such as those who enabled Chavez in Venezuela, who think they can somehow co-opt autocrats without getting burned.
If not a jeremiad against the current president, How Democracies Die provides a guide for Americans of all political persuasions for what to avoid.
CLOSE

  Wochit-All
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2mEj48j
