The WNBA is heading to Vegas
1.0k share 
 share 
 tweet 
 pin 
 sms 
 send 
 email 
Can the WNBA find its next loyal fan base in Sin City?
The WNBA’s San Antonio Stars are relocating to Las Vegas, becoming the third professional sports team to announce a relocation there since 2016. The Vegas Golden Knights began their inaugural season in the city this year and the Oakland Raiders are scheduled to move for the 2019 season.
“Las Vegas is the entertainment capital of the world and we are in the entertainment business with the WNBA. As we close out our 21st season, another record season, we are always looking at what else can we do,” WNBA President Lisa Borders said. “How can we improve the product? How can we have more fans enjoy the product? How can we strengthen our franchises and strengthen our league?
“And so having the opportunity for a franchise to play in such an outstanding market as Las Vegas and partner with an owner and operator like the MGM Resorts International is amazing for us.”
Spurs Sports & Entertainment, the Stars current owners, confirmed the sale of the team in a letter to fans in the San Antonio Express-News this week. It was first reported by the Associated Press and ESPN.
The Associated Press reported on Monday that the team’s outgoing general manager, Ruth Riley, told players in a conference call that the team was moving. Because many WNBA players spend their offseason playing overseas, they learned about the relocation from around the world.
“There was silence for about 15 seconds on the phone. It was so unexpected,” 2017 top draft pick Kelsey Plum told the AP from Turkey, where she’s playing in the WNBA offseason. “I think everyone was shocked. Moriah (Jefferson) asked if we would all still be together.”
A post shared by  Moriah Jefferson (@_bonnbonn) on Oct 15, 2017 at 6:52pm PDT
“For the past few days I’ve been trying to find the right words to say before I made this post,” Jefferson added on Instagram. “Well, let’s just say it’s not getting any easier. It has only been two years, but San Antonio became my home. From my teammates , coaches , trainers , family, friends , fans and all of the supporting staff that I have been surrounded by. We made memories to last a lifetime and needless to say this was the most shocking news I’ve gotten in a long time. I want to thank the fans for being amazing people and supporting us through hard times. Although we will be in new uniforms we will forever be a family ♥️.. Thank you San Antonio I will miss you! #Starsheart”
Plum later added to the AP that she was excited to play closer to her friends and family.
“Getting to Texas wasn’t the easiest thing for them. Now it’s a short flight or drive for them to come watch,” she said.
Bill Laimbeer, the former New York Liberty and Detroit Shock coach (and member of the Pistons), will be the Stars new coach and president of basketball operations. The addition of Laimbeer means that the team’s current GM, Riley, and coach Vickie Johnson won’t return to the team. ESPN reported that the players under contract will make the move with the team.
“It’s heartbreaking as we had laid a great foundation,” Johnson told ESPN. “They understood what I wanted to do. They understood the system. They understood it was bigger than individual stats. It was about a sisterhood, a trust. Playing the game the right way. They bought into it.”
Borders said she hadn’t gotten a chance to speak to a lot of the players because of their travel schedules but said she anticipated that they were “grateful for the time that they spent in San Antonio but are eagerly anticipating the opportunity to play with a new team in Las Vegas.”
“The players are young and they are adaptable and they are resilient so I anticipate that they will thrive in this new environment,” she added.
The move is a bold one for the league, which is coming off of one of its best seasons in its history. It had its highest attendance in six years and boosted its highest Finals TV ratings since 2003. Another team that plays at a casino resort, the Connecticut Sun, consistently boasts some of the league’s highest attendance – though they also have a boost with the proximity to women’s basketball powerhouse UConn.
When asked if the NBA had any reservations about the team’s move, Borders pointed to data from ESPN2 during the postseason that indicated Las Vegas was one of the top-10 markets for basketball.
“If you look at the data that we are researching on a regular basis along with not just the reputation but the evidence that says 43 million people find Las Vegas an extraordinary destination for entertainment and (rest and relaxation), it makes a whole lot of sense from that perspective,” she said. “We are a business that is driven by logical and rational decisions. We know that sports is often thought of as strictly emotional and we do understand that it makes you feel amazing as one of the two international languages. So no pushback (from the NBA) at all.”
The Stars have struggled on the court during the last few years, a far cry from their glory days when Becky Hammon led the squad. Last season, despite the addition of Plum, the team finished with an 8-26 record. Their last season with a record of above .500 came in 2012.
The move seems to follow with Borders’ and the league’s mission to increase attendance and reach around the basketball and entertainment world.
“You would like to see a full arena for every game. That’s what success looks like,” Borders told FTW last year.
MGM Resorts International will own and operate the team, which will play in Vegas starting at the 2018 season. Their home arena will be the Mandalay Bay Events Center.
The company’s Chief Experience and Marketing Officer Lillian Tomovich pointed to the success with the NBA’s Summer League, which has been in Las Vegas for the past 13 years.
“That’s attracted fans from around the world and certainly locals anticipate it every year. It’s just a huge success for the Las Vegas strip. And then of course we also have hosted a number of preseason exhibition games and that’s been very successful for us as well,” she said. “So this just means a natural evolution for us to enter into a WNBA agreement and everyone — I know there’s going to be a lot of excitement and buzz.”
The Stars franchise began as the Utah Starzz, one of the eight original WNBA teams. It relocated from Salt Lake City to San Antonio after the 2002 season.
