10 cruise ship suites that will blow your mind
The Regent Suite is priced at $10,000 per day, making it one of the most expensive accommodations on a cruise. The fare includes a wide range of perks including First or Business class airfare to and from the ship as well as private sedan transfers to and from airports. Gene Sloan, USA TODAY
 The over-the-top luxury of the Regent Suite is on full display in the master bedroom, which features a king size bed topped with a Savoir No. 1 mattress that cost $90,000. The mattress is filled with a special kind of horse hair. Regent Seven Seas Cruises
 Dubbed Balmoral and Sandringham, the Queen Mary 2's two Grand Duplex suites measure 2,249 square feet. Each has a spacious living room and dining area on the ground floor and a large master bedroom on the second floor. Greywolf Studios Limited
 Sleeping up to six, the Royal Loft Suite offers a panoramic view over the back of the ship from a two-deck-high living and dining room level. The space has a dry bar and sofa that converts into a double bed. Gene Sloan, USA TODAY
 Bedrooms in the Owner's Suites on Marina and Riviera feature mahogany Bel Air beds upholstered in steel-blue mohair and walls covered in Austyn cashmere. All of the rooms in the suites were decorated using Ralph Lauren furnishings by designer Susan Bednar Long. Oceania Cruises
 The luxurious master bedroom in the Roy O. Disney Suite offers sweeping ocean views through floor-to-ceiling windows. Amenities include deluxe Frette bed linens, fluffy Frette feather duvets and a selection of hypo-allergenic goose down and therapeutic memory foam pillows. Matt Stroshane, Matt Stroshane, photographer
 An owner's suite in more than just name, the Viking Star's Owner's Suite was designed as a personal retreat for Viking founder and chairman Torstein Hagen and features many of his personal items, including books from his collection and family portraits on bookshelves. Gene Sloan, USA TODAY
Last SlideNext Slide

One of the biggest stories in the cruise world in recent years has been the arrival of a new generation of unprecedented, over-the-top suites on ships: Big, bold and beautiful cabins that can cost tens of thousands of dollars per voyage. Just how over-the-top are they? Scroll through the carousel above to see for yourself. We've assembled our picks of the 10 most spectacular suites at sea, several of which have debuted in just the last year. They include the Regent Suite on luxury line Regent's new Seven Seas Explorer — at 4,443 square feet, bigger than the average American home — and the sprawling Wintergarden Suites on luxury line Seabourn's new Seabourn Encore.
As one might expect, luxury lines such as Regent and Seabourn have been rolling out many of the most stunning (and pricey) suites. But there's also been a super-suite arms race of sorts in recent years among the big, mass-market cruise operators such as Royal Caribbean and Norwegian Cruise Line, which are catering to an ever-broader range of customers (see the gallery below for a look at the swankiest suites on one of Royal Caribbean's newest ships).
As you'll see in the photos, the new crop of mega-suites offer multiple bedrooms, living areas with dining rooms and sprawling balconies. Sweeping views of the ocean are a given. But the allure of such accommodations doesn't end there. In addition to expensive furnishings and designer style, the top suites at sea now almost always come with around-the-clock butler service, priority embarkation and disembarkation, priority access to the ship's spa and restaurants and other perks.

 Royal Caribbean's Anthem of the Seas features some of the most elaborate suites at sea, including the two-deck-high, 1,640-square-foot Royal Loft Suite. Gene Sloan, USA TODAY
