Jordan renews prisoner swap offer after ISIL beheading
Jordan renewed its offer to exchange an al-Qaeda prisoner for a fighter pilot held hostage by the Islamic State on Sunday, as outrage and grief gripped Japan after the militant group released a video online that purports to show the beheading of hostage Kenji Goto.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 
CLOSE

 Jordan is willing to exchange an al-Qaeda prisoner for the safe return of Lt. Muath al-Kaseasbeh, a Jordanian pilot held hostage by the Islamic State. The renewed offer came after the Islamic State purportedly beheaded Japanese hostage Kenji Goto. VPC

Corrections & Clarifications: An earlier version of this story incorrectly stated which ISIL video contained a $200 million ransom demand. The demand was made in a video Jan 20.
Jordan renewed its offer Sunday to exchange an al-Qaeda prisoner for a fighter pilot held hostage by the Islamic State, as outrage and grief gripped Japan after the militant group released a video that purports to show the beheading of hostage Kenji Goto.
Jordan remains "as committed as ever" to the U.S.-led military coalition fighting the Islamic State, Foreign Minister Nasser Judeh said.
Japan braced for possible future attacks by tightening security at airports and Japanese facilities abroad, including embassies and schools. The country, until now, had not been directly embroiled in the battle against the extremists.
"I feel indignation over this immoral and heinous act of terrorism," Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said. In a phone call with Abe, Jordan's King Abdullah II condemned the killing as a "criminal act." And leaders from around the world, including President Obama, shared their sorrow over the death of Goto, 47, a journalist.
In a statement issued through a British-based journalist group, the wife of Goto, Rinko Jogo, requested privacy for her family as they deal with their loss and thanked those who had supported them.
"I remain extremely proud of my husband, who reported the plight of people in conflict areas like Iraq, Somalia and Syria," she said.
"It was his passion to highlight the effects on ordinary people, especially through the eyes of children, and to inform the rest of us of the tragedies of war," she said.
Goto left for Syria in late October just a few weeks after the birth of the couple's youngest daughter. Soon after, he was captured by the militants.
Goto's mother Junko Ishido told reporters, "Kenji has died, and my heart is broken. Facing such a tragic death, I'm just speechless."
In a separate interview, Goto's brother, Junichi Goto, said, "I was hoping he would return and thank everyone for his rescue, but that's impossible, and I'm bitterly disappointed."
The video of the apparent beheading of Goto was released via militant websites late Saturday, and it bore the symbols of previous tapes from the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS. Japan's defense minister, Gen Nakatani, said the police agency considers the video "highly likely to be authentic."

Goto's apparent death raises more concerns about the fate of the Jordanian pilot, Lt. Muath al-Kaseasbeh, who was also being held hostage.
The extremists earlier demanded that Jordan release Sajida al-Rishawi, an Iraqi woman who faces death by hanging for her role in triple hotel bombings in Jordan in 2005. The Islamic State, in an audio message last week, said the pilot would be killed if al-Rishawi was not released by sunset Thursday. That deadline passed, and Jordan said it wants proof the pilot was still alive before releasing her.
Government spokesman Mohammed al-Momani said Sunday that Jordan is "still ready to hand over" al-Rishawi in return for the pilot. He said Jordan was continuing its efforts to get proof that al-Kaseasbeh is still alive and to secure his release.
The pilot's father, Safi al-Kaseasbeh, said he is worried, but still is putting his faith in the government. "Of course, I'm concerned," he said by telephone. "This is my son. I'm always concerned about him and any development makes me more concerned."

 People in Tokyo walk past a big screen reporting that Kenji Goto was killed by Islamic State. Japan was in shock and mourning Sunday after the militant group released a video purportedly showing the beheading of Goto. Toru Yamanaka, AFP/Getty Images
Last SlideNext Slide
In Japan, a few dozen people gathered Sunday afternoon in front of Abe's official residence in downtown Tokyo to show sympathy for the hostages.
"I feel so sad and angry. Why didn't the government rescue Kenji?" said Mayuko Tamura, 31, a pediatrician who came with her husband and their 8-month-old baby.
CLOSE

 A small vigil was held for journalist Kenji Goto in Tokyo on Sunday following news that he had been beheaded apparently by Islamic State group militants. (Feb. 1) AP
Goto, a freelance journalist, was captured in October after going into Syrian territory to try to secure the release of another Japanese hostage, Haruna Yukawa. Goto was shown in an Islamic State video on Jan. 24 holding a photo that purported to show Yukawa's body. The militant group initially sought a $200 million ransom but later changed its demands to seek the release of al-Rishawi.
The pilot, al-Kaseasbeh, 26, fell into the hands of the militants in December when his F-16 crashed near Raqqa, Syria.
Contributing: Jane Onyanga-Omara, William M. Welch, USA TODAY; Associated Press
CLOSE

 A video reportedly released by the Islamic State shows the apparent beheading of Japanese journalist Kenji Goto. There is no word on whether or not a separate hostage, a Jordanian pilot, is still alive. VPC
CONNECTTWEET 27 LINKEDINEMAILMORE
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BIEWxP
