Joanne Lipman named Editor in Chief of USA TODAY
CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINEMAILMORE
Joanne Lipman, currently Chief Content Officer, has also been named Editor-in-Chief of USA TODAY.
 During her first year at Gannett, Lipman has been instrumental in harnessing the company’s more than 3,000 journalists to form the USA TODAY NETWORK and has been at the helm of impactful reporting and storytelling efforts that include projects such as “Lead in the Water,” “Teachers Misconduct,” and “Trump and the Law.” Lipman will remain focused on continuing to elevate the quality of journalism and storytelling across platforms throughout the NETWORK. 
 “Under Joanne’s leadership over the last year, we have made tremendous progress in bringing together the 110 properties of the USA TODAY NETWORK, elevating the journalism, accelerating innovation, and doing work we can all be proud of," said Maribel Wadsworth, SVP and Chief Transformation Officer of Gannett. "Having Joanne take on the additional role of Editor in Chief will further focus and drive forward these efforts at USA TODAY. Joanne is a leader who stays true to the USA TODAY purpose and brand, as a news organization with the highest journalistic standards possible. We are the one media organization in this country best positioned to reflect the lives and voices of the diverse country we serve.” 
 “I’m incredibly proud to be taking on the editor-in-chief role at USA TODAY, "said Lipman. "Over the past year I’ve been able to work with some of the most talented journalist in the country, both nationally and locally. In adding this new role to my CCO responsibilities, I look forward to giving even more of our talented voices a chance to be heard on a daily basis. We will continue delivering compelling stories that matter most to our audiences, across all platforms.”
 In addition to Joanne’s expanded role, a number of other promotions were announced as well:
Patty Michalski: Senior Director of Digital Audience Development for USA TODAY NETWORK and Executive Editor, Digital for USA TODAY.
Liz Nelson: Vice President, Strategic Content Development for the NETWORK
Jen Frigault: Vice President, Business Intelligence
Josh Awtry: Senior Director, Content Strategy
Reid Williams: Senior Director, Innovation and Storytelling Development.
Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2nBV74b
