Chevrolet's big change: Chase Elliott takes Camaro for first test on Texas track
Four NASCAR Monster Energy Cup Series drivers turned the first at-speed laps of 2018 Tuesday in the first of two scheduled days of Goodyear tire tests at Texas Motor Speedway.
Chase Elliott (Chevrolet), Martin Truex Jr. (Toyota) and Ford drivers Ryan Blaney and Aric Almirola ran laps at the 1.5-mile track as Goodyear engineers tested compounds for the coming season. The tests are held at several tracks each year, with different teams selected to participate at each facility.
Tuesday’s test was more newsworthy than normal because it was the first on-track activity for Chevrolet’s Camaro model, which will replace the SS in the Cup Series this year. Chevrolet teams expect the slicker Camaro to provide the opportunity for improvement over past seasons. The SS model was raced from 2013 to 2017.
Elliott’s cars will be numbered 9 this year, a throwback to the number his Hall of Fame father, Bill, ran for many years in NASCAR. He previously used 24.
Elliott, who attended Monday night’s college football championship game in Atlanta before traveling to Fort Worth, ran the morning test session at TMS and later said much about the new Camaro will remain relatively unknown until a few races have been run.
CLOSE

 USA TODAY Sports sat down with 2017 NASCAR Cup Series champion Martin Truex Jr. to discuss his emotions after winning the title. USA TODAY Sports
“I think until we get into situations where we are racing and we get some more general analysis of hey, the Chevrolets are better or the Chevys are qualifying better or the Chevys are racing better, I think until we get those generalizations of exactly how we stack up, it’s going to be hard to just make a ‘guesstimation’ of how the thing drives and say it’s better or worse,” Elliott said. “It’s hard for me to tell out there by myself.”
Also making a debut of sorts Tuesday was Blaney, who will move from Wood Brothers Racing to Team Penske this year. The Woods’ team is a satellite of the Penske operation, and Blaney was successful there, but this year will be his first full-time Cup season with the parent group.
Almirola also is in new territory this season, having moved from Richard Petty Motorsports to Stewart-Haas Racing.
Truex won the Cup championship last season and, with Toyota Racing Development at the top of its game, is expected to be among the contenders again this year.
