Liquor brands learn to segment the female market
Updated 
The ad shows a strikingly handsome spokesman dressed in firefighter's gear.

Sauza /AP
This image from Sauza's video shows a firefighter holding a bottle of Sauza Tequila for the brand's 'Make it with a Fireman' campaign.
EnlargeClose
Sauza /AP
This image from Sauza's video shows a firefighter holding a bottle of Sauza Tequila for the brand's 'Make it with a Fireman' campaign.
Sponsored Links
His shirt has a habit of disappearing, revealing sculpted pecs., and he chats in French with a beret-wearing kitten.
You don't have to watch Sauza Blue Tequila's latest YouTube video very long before you realize this is not your father's liquor ad.
With millions of views, the "Make it with a Fireman" video launched this year has caused quite a stir. Brand officials say social media mentions of Sauza are up and the adorable blue-eyed kitten costar has built a fan base of its own.
On a broader scale, the ad reflects a slight shift in spirits marketing, as some companies look beyond traditional male-oriented marketing campaigns.
"Companies are realizing that women comprise a very heavy percentage of the cocktail-drinking community, and I believe they are starting to speak more directly to women without the fear that they're going to alienate the male base," says Allison Evanow, founder and CEO of Square One Organic Spirits in San Francisco and one of the relatively few female executives in the spirits industry.
"There's more advertising that is either targeted to women or at least is not quite as male-dominated," she says.
For Sauza, the decision to engage female consumers was prompted by data showing that a good chunk of tequila is being consumed in margaritas. And those margaritas are being consumed by women.
"So you just look at that and you go, 'Wow! We should really be talking to this demographic,'" says Kevin George, chief marketing officer for Beam Inc., which owns Sauza.
Sauza's all-digital campaign started with suggested recipes for ladies nights in or out, and this year they looked at ways to deliver that message in a new context, hence the firefighter ad created by Euro RSCG Chicago.
Striking the same tongue-in-cheek note as the Old Spice TV spots featuring Isaiah Mustafa ("The Man Your Man Could Smell Like") the Sauza YouTube video is a mash-up of female appeal — Firemen! Kittens! — and aims to be just over-the-top enough to let women know they're in on the joke.
More ads are planned in the Sauza campaign. Meanwhile, the company has other brands with a feminine touch, include Red Stag Bourbon, launched in a black cherry flavor in 2009 and in honey tea and spiced versions this year, along with Skinnygirl Cocktails and Courvoisier Rose.
"Marketing spirits to women is something that we think is a big opportunity," says George.
Also reaching out is Campari America, formerly known as SKYY Spirits, home to a number of brands, including Yamazaki Japanese Single Malt Whisky and Wild Turkey. The company has created a "Women & Whiskies," campaign, a group and event series intended to give women a forum to enjoy and learn more about whiskies and cocktails.
On the consumer side, women have shown their interest in spirits, forming groups such as Ladies United for the Preservation of Endangered Cocktails, which has chapters in several major cities.
Kiki Braverman, cofounder of the San Francisco chapter of LUPEC, has seen the Sauza ad and liked its humor and originality. "I LOVE that a guy is the sex object," she says. Still, Braverman, who runs the microbrand Pur Spirits, featuring spirits from her native Germany, would like to see advertising go further.
"What about women like me? Professional women with families who neither party the night away nor dream of being rescued by a 22-year-old fireman, but who really do enjoy a good drink with their meal — and who actually have money to spend?" she asks.
At Square One, the company doesn't specifically market to women, but Evanow says consumers tend to be aware that the company is 97% female-owned, by Evanow and her sister; the other 3% include Evanow's husband and brother. "I feel like we have a combination of the 'Go, girls! Women Breaking Barriers in a Male-dominated Industry' message along with the cocktail," she says.
Evanow expects to see more women of spirits. "I feel like the female palate is changing," she says. "Women, as they start to get older, are starting to drink drier and less sweet, starting to incorporate more botanical and aged spirits into their repertoire," she says.
 For more information about reprints & permissions, visit our FAQ's. To report corrections and clarifications, contact Standards Editor Brent Jones. For publication consideration in the newspaper, send comments to letters@usatoday.com. Include name, phone number, city and state for verification. To view our corrections, go to corrections.usatoday.com. 
Posted | Updated 

 USA TODAY is now using Facebook Comments on our stories and blog posts to provide an enhanced user experience. To post a comment, log into Facebook and then "Add" your comment. To report spam or abuse, click the "X" in the upper right corner of the comment box. To find out more, read the FAQ and Conversation Guidelines. 
Advertisement
Most Popular E-mail Newsletter

Sign up to get:
Top viewed stories, photo galleries and community posts of the day
Most popular right now:
