Meal kit gift guide
Breakfast, lunch, dinner and dessert kits range from Crenn’s Chicken a la Provençale with sautéed Swiss chard ($33 for two servings) to chef Greg Norman’s Australian Prime Strip Steak with potato parsnip mash, cherry tomatoes and Brussels sprouts. courtesy of Chef'd
 Chef’d offers a wide range of meals for various skill levels in the kitchen, time restraints (10-minute meals are available), and special dietary requirements, including Weight Watchers-specific dishes. Meals come in portions for two or four adults. Oscar Zagal, courtesy of Chef'd
 One setback to the Chef’d kits is the price: many of the dishes’ prices rival restaurant prices, plus a $10 delivery fee. Portions also range by recipe, so depending on the eater’s appetite, the meal may not feel like a good value. courtesy of Chef'd
 Plated offers 20 recipes each week (both new dishes and repeat favorites), ranging from butter-basted cod with papas bravas to Cajun shrimp and corn chowder to cherry tomato chicken Parmesan with butternut squash. Nutritional and allergen information is available in advance of selecting the recipes, and vegetarian options are also available. courtesy of Plated
 Those looking for a ready-to-eat kit may be dismayed to find that some prep, like mincing garlic or dicing vegetables, will be required before Plated’s recipes are ready to cook. This, of course, also results in more dirty dishes than some no-chop kits. courtesy of Plated
 Dinnerly’s “no fuss” recipes have six ingredients per dish, can be made in half an hour or less, and include kid-friendly meals like fried spaghetti pie, Mexican baked beef and rice and Italian grilled cheese with marinara and garlicky spinach. Julia Gartland
 The perfect meal kit for the home cook one step above heating up a Lean Cuisine after a long day, RealEats uses exclusively sous vide (that’s air-tight plastic-wrapped) style packaging to reheat pre-cooked meals to the perfect texture and temperature. courtesy of RealEats
 Sous vide cooking has been used in kitchens in high-end restaurants as well as cafeterias for decades, so the technology isn’t new, but the concept has certainly risen in popularity in home kitchens in the past few years. courtesy of RealEats
 RealEats meals are made with a high proportion of organic ingredients and are preservative-free – the sous vide bags keep ingredients fresh for (at least) a week. Beyond the pot, the cook boils water in to heat the food and the dish to eat off of, it’s easy to avoid dirty dishes with this kit. courtesy of RealEats
 RealEats can be purchased in plates of four, six, eight or 12 (each plate is a single-serving meal), and though prices decrease with frequency of meals per week, prices are steep. Even with a 12 meal per week plan, each one costs $12.75. courtesy of RealEats
 Sun Basket offers one-pan meals like steak fajita lettuce wraps, host-worthy entertaining meals like white bean salad with charred cabbage and chimichurri, as well as nutritionist-endorsed weekly recipes like Manhattan-style cod chowder with potatoes and fennel. Family-style recipes are also available, like make-ahead sweet potato and black bean chili or pulled pork sugo with orecchiette. courtesy of Sun Basket
Last SlideNext Slide

Staying in is the new going out. Especially when temperatures drop and getting anywhere requires a serious commitment to layering, bundling, zipping and lacing up. And while restaurant gift cards may have been a go-to gift for holidays past, giving the pleasure of not even having to leave the house, may be much more well received.
Over the past five years, meal kits have completely changed the way America cooks — wholly removing the need to grocery shop, meal plan, and in many cases, prep ingredients for recipes perhaps unfamiliar to many kitchens across America until everything needed to make a specific type of soup or a fusion pasta dish arrived in a neatly packed box, with all the instructions, on the doorstep. Though Blue Apron’s IPO has failed to impress, new and creative meal kits are still making their ways into kitchens across the country, for cooks hooked on, or just getting into, the meal kit way of cooking.
A nationwide debate on the merits of meal kits has united both chefs and soup can-opening experts in strong opinions about the 21st-century style of home cooking. Are they as wasteful as some say they are? (Unwrap six individually packaged garlic cloves and you can form an opinion on this.) Are they actually teaching people to cook? Are they a sustainable business model?
Chef Diego Garcia, of New York City’s Gloria, doesn’t believe that meal kits have seriously impacted dining and going out culture, but he sees their merits. “They may help diners become more educated in ingredients, spices, sauces and fundamentals [of cooking], if they have genuine interest and curiosity,” he says. “We always encourage diners to cook more, learn to respect ingredients and learn more about the techniques involved.”
His advice for mastering a meal kit when you’ve barely managed to make boxed mac and cheese without troubleshooting? “I think a lot of people are obsessed with a perfect or secret recipe, but the truth is, recipes change all the time,” Garcia says. “For example, a perfectly cooked fish is a feeling, that you develop over time with lots and lots of practice — a recipe can't teach you that feeling. So keep practicing!” 
For those who cook on the regular to those who try to not quite re-create that Pinterest recipe for a special occasion, meal kits can be a way to spruce up a weeknight dinner or plan a special date night in with upscale meals for two. Beyond Blue Apron (who hasn’t claimed their free introductory meals at this point?), consider these new, popular and unique meal kits to gift to your favorite (aspiring) home cook this season.
Browse the photos above for reviews of popular meal kits and subscriptions, and see more gifts for foodies below.

 Alabama and barbecue go together like, well, grilled meat and barbecue sauce. Pour some southern flair onto chicken, pork or seafood with Big Bob Gibson’s Original White Sauce, which has been around since 1925. Order at bigbobgibson.com. Ben Fink
