Navratilova, Louganis, Mendoza among those pushing Congress to protect youth athletes
CLOSE

 SportsPulse: USA TODAY Sports' Nancy Armour believes the court system served justice with Nassar's sentencing of up to 175 years in prison, however, there are many lessons still needed to be learned from this nightmare of a story. USA TODAY Sports

Several former elite athletes --- including Martina Navratilova, Greg Louganis and Jessica Mendoza --- are part of a push to get Congress to pass legislation that aims to protect an estimated 8 million youth athletes from predators like former USA Gymnastics team doctor Larry Nassar, who was sentenced to 40 to 175 years in prison on Wednesday. 
The Protecting Young Victims from Sexual Abuse and Safe Sport Authorization Act was passed in the Senate in November, leaving only the approval from the House of Representatives before it would arrive on President Trump’s desk. The legislation would require mandatory reporting for suspected sexual abuse of any club or Olympic sport athlete by all members of the Olympic movement. 
“For both conservatives and liberals, this is something we all can agree on,” Nancy Hogshead-Makar, a former Olympic gold medalist and CEO of the organization Champion Women, told USA TODAY Sports. “We want to make spaces safe against predators.” 
The open letter to Speaker of the House Paul Ryan (R-Wisc.) and Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.), and petition created on Change.org that has gathered more than 2,000 backers comes after Hogshead-Makar said she’s hasn’t heard from McCarthy. 
“While the Senate legislation is similar in intent and scope there are a few differences that the House and Senate are now working out with the hope of having a final bill on the floor as early as next week,” Erin Perrine, a spokesperson for McCarthy, said in an email to USA TODAY Sports.
The bill also would fund the U.S. Center for SafeSport at $1 million per year for five years, which would allow the entity to become independent of the U.S. Olympic Committee. That would allow SafeSport to run the same way as the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency and reduce potential conflicts of interest. 
The USOC has come under increased scrutiny in the wake of several gymnasts --- including Simone Biles, McKayla Maroney, Gabby Douglas and Aly Raisman --- coming forward with abuse allegations against Nassar. The USOC also has faced criticism over other sexual abuse scandals in USA Taekwondo and USA Swimming. 
"Many of them, myself included, claim the USOC is also at fault,” Raisman wrote in a statement posted to Twitter earlier this week. “Was the USOC there to 'focus on supporting the brave survivors'? No. Did they issue any statement then? Crickets."
The SafeSport provision was among the changes added by the Senate after the House approved the first version of the bill, requiring another House vote.
The bill also gives SafeSport and sports organizations legal protections against defamation lawsuits arising out of investigations of coaches or others involved in amateur sports suspected of abuse. It also makes it easier for victims of sexual abuse to recover monetary damages.
Asked whether she thought Trump would sign the bill if it gets House approval, Hogshead-Makar admitted she wasn't certain. 
“I wish I had some sense of that,” Hogshead-Makar said. “I just want to protect kids.”
Follow Perez on Twitter @byajperez

 Aerials skier Ashley Caldwell is the reigning women's world champion. Jeffrey Swinger-USA TODAY Sports
