Young drivers strike back after Kyle Busch criticizes NASCAR's promotional push
CLOSE

 Not a bad set-up. USA TODAY Sports

CHARLOTTE — Rising star Ryan Blaney shot back at former champion Kyle Busch Wednesday for criticizing NASCAR’s marketing emphasis on younger drivers.
Asked his opinion Tuesday on the public relations push to gain visibility for younger drivers, Busch called the approach “stupid,” complaining that NASCAR and speedways promote “all these younger guys for fans to figure out and pick up on and choose as their favorite driver. Some of these marketing campaigns, pushing these younger drivers, I would say is not all that fair.”
Blaney, 24 and one of the most promising of the younger group of drivers, said Busch might be out of the promotional spotlight because of choice.
“I think it’s good for the sport and myself,” Blaney said Wednesday at the NASCAR Charlotte Motor Speedway Media Tour. “I can tell you personally he (Busch) doesn’t like doing a lot of stuff. That’s why they don’t ask him to do a lot of stuff. That kind of made me upset how he bashed that part of it, but to each his own.
“If he doesn’t want to do anything, so be it. I think it’s really important to have not only young drivers but all NASCAR drivers to be pushing to get to new demographics.
I’m trying to do the best that I can at it.”
PHOTOS: RYAN BLANEY THROUGH THE YEARS
Ty Dillon, 25, said promoting younger drivers is a positive.
“I don’t know if he (Busch) realizes how much of a following he gets,” Dillon said Wednesday. “I think it’s great for NASCAR to push the younger demo. We need to keep getting those fans.
“You shouldn’t rely on NASCAR to do all your social and outreach for you. We have great platforms to do that. I think if he feels that way, if he’s that frustrated, he should use his platform to go after those fans himself.”
At 20 years old, rookie William Byron is at the youngest end of the driver age scale.
“When new guys come in, it’s kind of a fresh thing to talk about,” Byron said. “But we’re going to have to ultimately prove ourselves on the racetrack and do things that show we are capable of being part of this sport.”
PHOTOS: 2018 NASCAR CUP SERIES SCHEDULE
