Preferred Hotels to expand next year
Preferred Hotels & Resorts, one of the largest independent hotel brands in the world, will launch 13 new properties next year.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed. 

Preferred Hotels & Resorts, one of the largest independent hotel brands in the world, will launch 14 new properties next year.
The properties will be located from Houston and Charleston to Shanghai and Vienna.
Preferred Hotels has 650 properties in 85 countries around the world.
The company plans to add 100 new properties next year.
The new hotels include:
Bobby Hotel, Nashville
The nine-story Bobby Hotel will feature 144 guestrooms and suites, four dining outlets and a rooftop bar with a 1956 Greyhound tour bus. The hotel, which will open in the Spring, is located in the Arts District near Printer’s Alley in downtown Nashville.
The Post Oak Hotel, Houston
The Post Oak Hotel at Uptown Houston will have 250 rooms and suites, 20 executive residences and shops. It will have a Rolls-Royce, Bentley, and Bugatti showroom. Restaurants will include Mastro’s Steakhouse and Willie G’s Seafood. The hotel will also have a spa. A 5,000 square-foot presidential suite has a media room, personal gym, private elevator access, and a helipad. The hotel will open in the Spring. 
Montage Los Cabos, Cabo San Lucas, Mexico
This property is located on 39 beachfront acres in Santa Maria Bay. It will feature 122 guestrooms and suites, 52 Montage Residences, the Spa Montage, two pools, and multiple dining venues. Children will be entertained with the Paintbox program. Montage Los Cabos will be the sixth property and the first outside of the USA from Montage Hotels & Resorts to join Preferred.
Pestana Amsterdam Riverside, Amsterdam
Located in the historic former Town Hall in the De Pijp neighborhood, the new Pestana Amsterdam Riverside is set on the banks of the river near the Albert Cuypmarkt. The hotel has 154 rooms, suites, and apartments. It will have a rooftop, indoor pool, two saunas, and a gym. Dutch chef Peter Lute will oversee the restaurant, ARC. The hotel will open in February.
The Middle House, Shanghai
Set to open in early 2018, The Middle House will have 111 rooms and 102 serviced apartments. Part of The Swire Group’s House Collective, the property has several outdoor spaces. New York-based chef Gray Kunz will oversee Café Gray Deluxe. A 14th floor penthouse will overlook Nanjing Roadand features two bedrooms, an open bathroom with a freestanding bathtub, and a private terrace with a private show kitchen.
Other 2018 openings from Preferred include:
PhilsPlace Vienna (launching April 2018)
Sherwood Suites, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, (Launching December 2017)
The Primus Hotel Shanghai Hongqiao, Shanghai, China (launching January 2018)
Las Olas Ocean Resort, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, USA (launching May 2018)
Hotel Bennett, Charleston, South Carolina, USA (launching summer 2018)
Hotel Monville, Montreal, Canada (launching July 2018)
Hotel Sophy, Chicago, USA (launching July 2018)
Garza Blanca Los Cabos, Cabo San Lucas, Mexico (launching July 2018)
Carrosa Hotel Spa Villas, Mallorca, Spain (launching May 2018)

 The London West Hollywood is celebrating its 10th anniversary with an $11 million renovation. The London West Hollywood
