North and South Korea will march together under one flag at the Olympics
North Korea and South Korea marched under the same flag during the 2006 Winter Olympics in Italy.

North and South Korea plan to march under a united flag at the 2018 Winter Olympics opening ceremonies and compete together on their first joint Olympic team — a diplomatic breakthrough that suggests a thaw in tensions between the two nations. 
The two countries agreed to the display of unity on Wednesday after high-level talks at the South border village of Panmunjom.
The South Korea Unification Ministry said the two countries will also form a joint women’s ice hockey team — the first time they have contributed athletes to the same team at the Olympics.
North Korea and South Korea plan to march under the Korean Unification flag, which displays the entire Korean peninsula in blue against a white backdrop. That’s rare, but not unprecedented. The two countries first displayed the flag at the 1991 World Table Tennis Championships and most recently at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Italy. 
North Korea and South Korean skiers will also train together at a resort in North Korea before the games start on February 9 in Pyeongchang, South Korea.
In addition to athletes, North Korea is expected to send hundreds of cheerleaders and orchestral musicians for the ceremonies.
But North Korea’s participation in the games isn’t certain. It missed the registration deadlines, and now it is up to the International Olympics Committee to approve the proposal.
Regardless of the outcome, the new agreements are a sign that talks between the two countries are going well, and could expand to address other issues as well — most importantly, North Korea’s nuclear program. Pyongyang’s nuclear program and its ballistic missile technology have advanced rapidly in the past year, and the global community has responded by isolating North Korea diplomatically and economically.
If talks between North Korea and South Korea really start to take off, it could help lay the foundation for other countries to engage with North Korea and work toward some kind of solution to its nuclear program.
Not everyone is on board with the new Olympic plan yet
While the Olympic unity plan could portend a thaw in tensions between the two countries, it’s being met with some skepticism both within South Korea and internationally.
The head coach of South Korea’s women’s hockey team said on Tuesday that if North Korean players are added to her team, it could cause “damage” to her players. Conservative South Korean press has also criticized the prospect of a joint hockey team, and said it could hurt the country’s chances at winning a medal. 
The BBC reports that tens of thousands of South Koreans have signed an online petition calling for South Korean President Moon Jae-in to drop the plan to integrate the ice hockey team.
And Japanese Foreign Minister Taro Kono told Reuters on Tuesday that new talks between North Korea and South Korea don’t mean that the world should ease its pressure on Kim. “It is not the time to ease pressure, or to reward North Korea.” 
Japan is a key regional player whose citizens are increasingly worried about conflict with North Korea.
“The fact that North Korea is engaging in dialogue could be interpreted as proof that the sanctions are working,” Kono said.
North Korea’s charm offensive with South Korea could have many different consequences. Among them: a split between the US and South Korea on strategy for reigning in North Korea. 
South Korea is keen on talking with North Korea no matter the circumstances, and could decide that this is the right entry point for broader conversations about North Korea’s nuclear program.
But the US has generally called for North Korea to fulfill preconditions before talks; in November Trump called for Kim to give up his nuclear weapons as a prerequisite for talks to begin.
That difference could drive a wedge between the US and South Korea, and make each of them weaker as they pursue different paths for reining in Pyongyang.
Was this article helpful?
 yes no 
Awesome, share it:
