What is the quality incentive program?
Card 1 of 15
 How are US doctors paid?
Card 2 of 15
 How are health-care prices set in the US?
Card 3 of 15
 What are accountable care organizations?
Card 4 of 15
 What are bundled payments?
Card 5 of 15
 What is the quality incentive program?
 If the problem with the US health-care system is that it doesn't reward doctors for making patients healthier, then perhaps the best solution is to establish measures of quality care and reward medical providers based on how well they score on those measures. That's the thinking that went into Obamacare's quality incentive program.
 The program, known as Hospital Value-Based Purchasing, sets aside a certain percent of Medicare payments that would have gone to hospitals in the past and instead places the money in a new pool for the program. Doctors can recoup the payments and more by scoring well on the federal government's health-care quality measures.
 In fiscal 2014, hospitals had their payments reduced by 1.25 percent (this number will change from year to year). But if hospitals post impressive scores on two-dozen quality measures, they can recover part or all of that funding — or even more than 1.25 percent, if they do really well.
 More hospitals were net losers in the latest year of the quality incentive program. In total, 1,451 hospitals are being paid less for each Medicare patient they treat, while 1,231 are being paid more.

These are, like other Obamacare programs, very much preliminary outcomes. Health-care experts caution that it's possible, for example, that hospitals will look at how other medical providers are improving on the quality measures and then improve their own scores in the years to come.
 There's also some debate about how to measure quality. Some worry that patients, who might lack medical savvy, could misjudge a doctor even when his or her advice is truly the best medical option. Others question whether some measures might underestimate how difficult it is for doctors to treat, for example, low-income patients who can't commit to some treatments due to high drug prices and transportation costs.
 Meanwhile, RAND Corporation's analysis of the research into pay-for-performance programs found mixed results for both cost reductions and health outcomes. The studies with the strongest methodologies, according to RAND, found either poor or mixed results. But, particularly on the cost side, RAND said more research is needed.
Card 6 of 15
 What is a patient-centered medical home?
Card 7 of 15
 What is the readmission penalty?
Card 8 of 15
 What is the Independent Payment Advisory Board?
Card 9 of 15
 What is the Cadillac tax?
Card 10 of 15
 How will Obamacare's changes to doctor payments affect patients?
Card 11 of 15
 Will Obamacare’s changes to doctor payments save money?
Card 12 of 15
 What does it mean to "bend the health-care cost curve"?
Card 13 of 15
 How else could the US bring down health-care costs?
Card 14 of 15
 You didn't answer my question!
Card 15 of 15
 Where else can I learn about how US doctors are paid?
