The 13 comic books best comic books right now
Card 1 of 14
 A-Force: a superhero team you'll quickly fall in love with
 

 A-Force (Marvel)
 
 When you think of Marvel's greatest superhero teams, the X-Men, Avengers, and possibly the Guardians of the Galaxy come to mind. Each group has their own personality, their own narrative, their own collection of fantastic superpowers, but most of all, their own moments that — for better or worse — make them, well, them.
 A-Force, by writers Kelly Thompson and G. WIllow Wilson and artist Jorge Molina, tells the story of Marvel's all-female squad of heroes — a brawler (She-Hulk), a magician (Nico Minoru), a cosmic powerhouse (Captain Marvel), a renegade mutant (Dazzler), and an inhuman queen (Medusa),who set out to save the universe, specifically one universe named Singularity that has recently become sentient. Yes, it's totally weird, and I'm not sure how the science all works, but just go with it.
 The comic is a loose continuation of a miniseries (of the same name) that premiered during Marvel's Secret Wars event but thanks to some nifty world-building and reality warping, you don't need to have read that series to make sense of the story Thompson, Wilson, and Molina are weaving.
 I wasn't super fond of A-Force's debut issue — Singularity's narration, which is a bit like baby-speak, was inconsistent and felt a little off to me — but in the two issues that followed, it slowly improved to become one of Marvel's more exciting books.
 Thompson and Wilson shine in the A-Force's quieter moments, when various members are bickering amongst themselves. With the introduction of each super heroine, the creative team reveals new wrinkles and dynamics we haven't seen before. And it's fun to see conflicts arise where they're not expected (like the clashes between Medusa and Nico) , and some where they are (like Dazzler's dissonance). Medusa's portrayal as the team's haughty queen and general sour sport is perfection.
 The A-Force is also brighter and sunnier than your typical Marvel superhero group (though their story is still more Buffy than Broad City). There's a sly self-awareness and playfulness to the comic's sequences — from its snappy dialogue to its art.
 A-Force wouldn't be as successful without Molina's deft style. The detail he puts into each hero's expressions gives the book life and emotional momentum — the stuff that makes the A-Force, A-Force — on each page.
Card 2 of 14
 Bitch Planet: a heartbreaking call to arms

Bitch Planet. (Image Comics)
 Kelly Sue DeConnick and Valentine De Landro's Bitch Planet isn't known for its subtleties.
 That's not to say the comic is devoid of nuance or quiet moments; in fact, there are plenty. But I've always seen Bitch Planet as more of a call to arms, a sledgehammer to the face of the society it reflects. In telling the story of a distant future where the patriarchy has gone unchecked and become omnipotent, and where nonconforming women are sent to the hellish galactic prison in the title, Bitch Planet destroys any notion that society treats women fairly. And it's in those shattered pieces, the unanswered questions about the flaws of our reality, that the comic book's true power lies.
Card 3 of 14
 Black Panther: writer Ta-Nehisi Coates takes on his dream job

The cover of Coates's Black Panther. (Marvel)
 What happens when a country that's meant to be exceptional … isn't? And what happens when you're the leader of that place?
 Those are the questions that writer and National Book Award-winner Ta-Nehisi Coates, together with artist Brian Stelfreeze, is tackling in Black Panther, the most anticipated comic book debut of the last decade.
 Black Panther, who recently made his onscreen debut in Captain America: Civil War has been a prominent, regal character in Marvel's comic books for the last two decades. But his story has always felt a bit compressed.
 Many comics that have featured Black Panther have touched on the responsibility he feels in being tethered to his country — the nation of Wakanda — but they've never fully realized the complicated political situation he's in or fleshed out the people he's pledged his fealty to.
 But Coates's and Stelfreeze's comic book does just that; they understand that telling the story of Black Panther is telling the story of his people.
 The highlight of Coates's writing in Black Panther isn't the way he skillfully laces the comic with broader political themes about power (though he's very good at that); instead, it's his ability to give the book's intimate character relationships a sense of humanity and dignity.
 It's perfectly paired with Stelfreeze's art, which is crisp and expressive. He's almost drawing a sleek space opera of sorts, since Wakandan technology is so advanced. The mêlées are exciting, rattling, Star Wars–esque sequences. But with a flick of the page, Stelfreeze is able to deftly shift into solemn drama, conveying weighty moments and relationships with the same precision.
 Ultimately, Stelfreeze and Coates have woven a story that Black Panther deserves, and one that pushes the legend of the man forward into bold, exciting territory.
Card 4 of 14
 Bombshells: a love letter to DC's female superheroes

Bombshells. (DC Comics)
 Bombshells would be a Cinderella story if Cinderella wore motorcycle boots and traded in her ball gown for a leather jacket. The book is set in a universe where female superheroes like Batwoman, Mera, and Wonder Woman fight Nazis — these women are all that stand between Hitler and global domination. But they're more than just a vintage, badass team of superpowered ladies styled as Vargas girls.
 The creative duo of Marguerite Bennett and Marguerite Sauvage plays with the idea of living in a world where female superheroes aren't merely derivatives of the male superheroes who came before them. The comic pokes fun at the idea of how women are presented by men — a meta-commentary on the decades of female comic book superheroes written and drawn by men. It's a clever wrinkle, executed in a playful, intelligent, and deeply hilarious style.
Card 5 of 14
 Faith: a superhero we can relate to

Faith. (Valiant Comics)
 Superheroes have long represented the best of humanity, but they've never represented all humans — a concept that comics are only just beginning to figure out. Enter Faith Herbert, a.k.a. Zephyr, a superhero who happens to be plus-size. 
 Faith is a geek, she's a little bit awkward, and she has the power of telekinesis — the ability to move objects with her mind. She's also working at a viral news website and has a dowdy civilian alter ego. And through it all, her story becomes an exploration of the gulf between fantasy and reality and what those terms mean when it comes to being a hero.
 The debut issue, released in January, was a winning one, as we got a glimpse of Faith's day-to-day life, her fears, and her romantic daydreams. It really established her as a character we can both root for and laugh with.
 But there's also something sinister — something that involves creepy blonde clones and missing teens — looming.
 There are moments when the comic, from writer Jody Houser and artists Francis Portela and Marguerite Sauvage, feels like a modern update of the classic Clark Kent story. But it also manages to find its own voice, and its own dark chords to hit. 
Card 6 of 14
 Jonesy: a comic book to fall in love with

Jonesy. (Boom)
 Jonesy is a sharp new comic from writer Sam Humphries and artist Caitlin Rose Boyle. It is equal parts Saved by the Bell, Adventure Time, and Daria smashed into the story of an adorable, maniacal, angsty tween named Jonesy who has some very strange special powers.
 The book is imbued with the manic pace and humor — some of it involving ferrets! —that you find in a lot of the best children's programming, but it also has a sweet heart that will reach older audiences. At the end of the day, Jonesy is a comic about friendship and understanding.
 Perhaps it's because we live in a world where friendship can be quantified in "likes" and "faves," but there's something in Jonesy's humanity and naiveté that resonates in the comic's big-eyed, goopy, bliss-inducing art. The story is deceptively silly, in the best kind of way.
Card 7 of 14
 Lumberjanes: the most powerful comic about friendship

Lumberjanes. (Boom)
 Lumberjanes is the kind of comic book you wish you'd had when you were a kid. Or the kind of comic book that makes you wish you were a kid again.
 Right away, the comic drops you into its Tumblr-esque, whimsical, slapstick world that centers on a group of girl scouts and their apocalyptic, supernatural camp. There, they take on werewolves, Yetis, punk rock merpeople, and other fantastic beasts. 
 Beneath this surface of strange creatures is a story about compassion and the reality of growing up. Aside from the supernatural crises they face, the girls also deal with real-life issues like crushes (sometimes on other girls) and falling-outs with friends — and even heavier things like coming out as transgender. What makes Lumberjanes special is that these very real topics are handled with a grace and honesty that's hard to find in any other comic book today.
Card 8 of 14
 Monstress: a dazzling, unapologetic, and gruesome adventure

Monstress. (Image Comics)
 Marjorie Liu and Sana Takeda's Monstress might be the most ambitious comic book on the market. It takes guts to go all out and create a swirling fantasy adventure at a time when the industry is trending toward sci-fi, superhero, and more grounded stories. But in this case, that gamble has paid off. 
 Liu and Takeda have created a world that's as gorgeous — think the dreamy steampunk aesthetic of the best Final Fantasy games — as it is gruesome and a story that's as urgent as it is enduring. Our heroine is Maika, a girl with a literal hairy monster inside of her. We get to watch her learn, and she teaches us about survival.
 Maika's monster is what she needs to survive when the world around her wishes she wouldn't. It gives her great power, but it also makes her feared by some and hunted by others. And all her life, she's been taught to be scared of it.
 Make no mistake, Monstress is a political book. It asks questions about how society treats powerful women and about the war women face on a daily basis. And it offers no tidy answers. 
Card 9 of 14
 Ms. Marvel: the generation-defining hero we need

Ms. Marvel. (Marvel)
 the story of Kamala Khan, a shape-shifting Muslim American superhero who, at the end of the day, wants to save Jersey City and maybe snag a cheeseburger and a date along the way. The created an intelligent, endearing story that soars and redefines who superheroes are, what they stand for, and how we see them.
 Wilson and Alphona imbue the comic with grace while steering clear of "after-school special"-of-the-month types of stories. Kamala's is a personal tale where we see the intimate nuances of her life as a Muslim American girl growing up in the US, smashed up against her duty to save Jersey City. 
 As you see Kamala slowly figure out the ways of superheroism and the balance of her own life, you can't help but feel like she represents an alternate path that can save us from the ugly stuff threatening to strangle our hope, our joy, and our love. That's why superheroes were first created, and it's why 
Card 10 of 14
 Paper Girls: the next great American comic book

Paper Girls. (Image Comics)
 Following up a hit comic like Saga would be intimidating for anyone not named Brian K. Vaughan. Saga, which Vaughan created with artist Fiona Staples, is still the standard by which all other comic books are judged. The Eisner Award–winning space opera invigorated the independent comic book industry with a story that is as sexy as it is funny and as beautiful as it is moving. It's so over the top (think magic spells, a seal who wears overalls, and an immolating gorilla) yet so very real (a story about familial love and the struggle to survive).
 But in 2015, Vaughan teamed up with Cliff Chiang to deliver Paper Girls, about the weird, jaw-dropping adventures — including time-traveling alien mutants — of a gang of newspaper delivery girls in suburban Cleveland (Vaughan's hometown). The story opens with an earnest, Spielberg-esque vibe that sends you soaring before abruptly plunging you down into the creepy and bizarre, ultimately leaving you with the most WTF cliffhanger (involving a ubiquitous device that we're all intimately familiar with in our everyday lives) of the year.
 I have no idea where Paper Girls is going next — there are so many questions — but I trust Vaughan and Chiang to deliver (and they do, every month). The questions are just part of what makes Paper Girls so good.
Card 11 of 14
 Plutona: Lemire and Lenox have created a haunting stunner
 

Plutona. (Image Comics)
 Writer-artist Jeff Lemire is prolific. He's independently publishing the fantastic sci-fi comic book Descender with artist Dustin Nguyen, at Marvel he's in charge of the rapidly improving Extraordinary X-Men as well as Hawkeye and Moon Knight, and he's doing work at Valiant. It's possible that in a year or two, you could be reading a best-of comics list composed entirely of Lemire titles.
 What Lemire does so very well, and better than anyone in the business right now, is conjure up the feeling of being a kid — the awkwardness, the pain, the hope, the moxie, the fear, and the fearlessness — and translate it into the pages of a comic book. He's also savvy about working with artists who complement his strengths.
 This all comes together in Plutona. With Emi Lenox's delicate, thoughtful art, the book stands out as an eerie, creaky, Stand by Me–ish mystery about five suburban kids who discover that the world's strongest superhero, Plutona, is dead.
 Plutona's death is a mystery, but the focus of the book is on what the kids do next. Who do they tell? Should they tell someone? What happens to kids when their heroes die?
 There's also an unshakable darkness and gloominess that haunts the first arc — a musing on the concept of superhero fatigue and fandom, but also about the loneliness of being a kid.
Card 12 of 14
 The Legend of Wonder Woman: the comic a legendary hero deserves

Legend of Wonder Woman (DC Comics)
 The common knock on Wonder Woman, a.k.a. Diana Prince, has always been that her origins — which involves that magical lariat of truth, Amazons, and Greek weirdness — is too weird and too esoteric for a general audience to understand. In 2013, an exec at DC Comics called the character "tricky" because she doesn't have a single, clear backstory that everybody knows. This alleged comic book unapproachability is why Wonder Woman's origins have been changed so many times, and a major factor in why it's taken so long for a Wonder Woman movie to be made.
 Ray Dillon and Renae De Liz's brand new comic The Legend of Wonder Woman is the magic bullet to that problem. A DC digital-first comic (meaning it starts out intended for online reading and then published in print), Legend of Wonder Woman begins with Diana's mythology-driven childhood on the island of Themyscira and follows her journey into becoming Wonder Woman.
 The comic leans into Diana's campy, Greek mythology-driven roots but also maintains a sense of humanity when it comes to showing the pressure of growing up as Queen Hippolyta's daughter. It boasts a well-designed mix of geekery and inclusivity that rewards both longtime fans and Wonder Woman neophytes. And though it isn't cannon, you'll wish it were, because De Liz has really made Wonder Woman's story more relatable and accessible.
 Perhaps the most surprising thing about the comic is it the way it reminds you of how hilarious and unapologetically political Wonder Woman can be. The book is a celebration of feminism and women, but it doesn't feel like anyone is being punished to make a point. De Liz and Dillon use the setting of World War II and Diana's lack of understanding about life beyond the island Themyscira to hilariously illustrate how women, including Diana herself, are constantly underestimated.
 Just like its hero, there's a kindness to The Legend of Wonder Woman that extends beyond its pages. It's a charming and disarming read. And De Liz and Dillon have really given Wonder Woman the comic she deserves.
Card 13 of 14
 The Wicked + The Divine: a comic book love letter to music, fame, and mythology

The Wicked + The Divine. (Image)
 WicDiv was my favorite comic of 2014, and one of my favorites in 2015. It's chic and brimming with swagger.
 The story — 12 gods are reincarnated every 90 or so years and only allowed to live for two, so they make the most of their limited time by taking the form of pop stars — began as riveting murder mystery. Someone may or may not have framed Lucifer, and the hunt for the truth becomes the first arc.
 But since the title's early meteoric rise, things have settled down a bit, allowing creators Jamie McKelvie (the artist) and Kieron Gillen (the writer) to have fun and be more ambitious than they were in the first arc. There's more experimental storytelling, more gambles with the book's characters, plus moments that explore issues like the role of social media in our lives.
 The comic's standout issue to date is No. 14, a dark dive into the psyche of the misogynistic Woden, a Norse god who's taken the form of one half of Daft Punk. It splices together art from every other issue of WicDiv and sets that art under the patina of digital technology — exactly as a misogynistic DJ god might do.
 Over the past year, this book has unfurled its wings and unveiled something bigger, badder, and grander than it first appeared to be. When it launched, it was clear WicDiv could be the hippest comic book in the land. What I didn't realize at the time was how good it would become at everything else.
Card 14 of 14
 Changes to the list
 June 15, 2016: Removed Grayson and Midnighter because both series have ended. Added Black Panther.
 March 4, 2016: Added The Legend of Wonder Woman and A-Force. Removed Spider-Man.
