What is cinematography? - Oscars 2017: the most confusing categories
Card 1 of 11
 Best Picture goes to a film's producers
Card 2 of 11
 What does a director do, anyway?
Card 3 of 11
 The difference between original and adapted screenplays has to do with source material
Card 4 of 11
 The voters determine whether actors are "lead" or "supporting"
Card 5 of 11
 The foreign film award goes to a country, not a person
Card 6 of 11
 What is cinematography?
 Technically — and to be incredibly pedantic about it — cinematography is the ability to manipulate light to create images within film cameras. But functionally, the award honors much more than that.
 A cinematographer is usually known as a "director of photography," and that title may be easier to immediately understand. Within the film industry, cinematography is usually understood to encapsulate everything having to do with the camera — its movement, the images it captures, the light it receives, etc.
 That's why several recent cinematography Oscars (awarded to Gravity, Life of Pi, Hugo) have recognized impressive camera feats that, while beautiful, were created in computers. (I don't mean to discount the cinematographers who created those images, but rather to note that said images are often not as "pure" as they might appear. Indeed, some people have suggested splitting the category in two, one for computer-assisted images and one for those without.) The 2015 award went to Birdman, which is all about the restless movement of the camera and appears to take place in one long shot. (Clever edits mask the cuts.)
 The cinematographer and director often work closely together to create the images you see onscreen, but the Oscar for cinematography is usually meant to recognize a film's visual beauty or, occasionally, its movement and momentum. In the 1980s and '90s, the award went to films with beautiful exterior landscapes; now, it typically goes to the creation of painterly images within computer-assisted visual effects.
Card 7 of 11
 What is film editing?
Card 8 of 11
 What is production design?
Card 9 of 11
 Sound mixing and sound editing really are two different things
Card 10 of 11
 An original song is supposed to be important to the film
Card 11 of 11
 A "short film" must be 40 minutes or less
