What does a director do, anyway? - Oscars 2017: the most confusing categories
Card 1 of 11
 Best Picture goes to a film's producers
Card 2 of 11
 What does a director do, anyway?
 The answer to this question isn't necessarily intuitive, because the popular definition of "director" is just "the person who's in charge on a movie set." And that's not wrong, but it also doesn't really dig into what a director does beyond bossing people around.
 The simple answer is that in the '60s and '70s, the director replaced the producer as the most important person working on a film, in the minds of people in the industry. (Many proponents of auteur theory would argue the director had always been the most important person working on a film, and it just took that long for Hollywood to catch up. But that's neither here nor there.) The director is responsible for the overall look, feel, and tone of a film. And assuming she has final cut, she's the ultimate decider, on everything from script notes to the edit that's released to theaters. (Yes, the studio will have some say in this, but the studio doesn't get the Oscar.)
 What makes the job difficult to describe, ultimately, is that different directors approach the job in different ways. Oscar-winning director William Friedkin has argued the most important part of a director's job is assembling the right cast and turning them loose. Robert Altman (director of M.A.S.H. and Nashville, among others) assembled huge ensemble casts and allowed for ample room for improvisation and exploration. British director Mike Leigh (of the recent Mr. Turner) comes up with his scripts in conjunction with his actors, who improvise until they're happy with the screenplay, and then begin the shoot.
 But the most basic part of a director's job is making calls about what the film will look like. Because film is a visual medium, images are incredibly important, and great directors have immediately recognizable, signature styles. Think of, say, the many times Steven Spielberg has shot characters staring at something in wonder, or the many times Martin Scorsese has employed bravura tracking shots that follow a character through his or her native environment.
Card 3 of 11
 The difference between original and adapted screenplays has to do with source material
Card 4 of 11
 The voters determine whether actors are "lead" or "supporting"
Card 5 of 11
 The foreign film award goes to a country, not a person
Card 6 of 11
 What is cinematography?
Card 7 of 11
 What is film editing?
Card 8 of 11
 What is production design?
Card 9 of 11
 Sound mixing and sound editing really are two different things
Card 10 of 11
 An original song is supposed to be important to the film
Card 11 of 11
 A "short film" must be 40 minutes or less
