Joel Taylor of 'Storm Chasers' dead at 38
Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as it unfolds.

Joel Taylor joined "Storm Chasers" in its second season.
Story highlights
Taylor was part of the "Storm Chasers" team
A cause of death has not yet been determined
 (CNN)
Joel Taylor, who appeared on the Discovery series "Storm Chasers" has died, a rep for his family confirmed to CNN.
He was 38.
"We can confirm that Joel Taylor has passed away while on a cruise," funeral director Richard Duggar II said in a statement on behalf of Taylor's family. "The cause of the death has not yet been determined. We ask for your understanding during this difficult time and your respect for the family while they deal with the loss of their son. "
Taylor appeared on the reality series from 2008 until its cancellation in 2012.
A native of Elk City, Oklahoma, Taylor studied meteorology at the University of Oklahoma and chased tornadoes with friend Reed Timmer for the 2003 documentary "Tornado Glory."
Read More
Timmer eulogized his friend on Twitter Tuesday, writing "RIP my best friend and storm chasing partner, Joel Taylor."
"I am shocked and absolutely devastated by the loss of my incredible, caring friend," he wrote. "We chased so many intense storms, and I wish we could have just one more storm chase. I'll miss you forever, Joel."
"We lost a legend," Timmer added.
RIP my best friend and storm chasing partner, Joel Taylor. I am shocked and absolutely devastated by the loss of my incredible, caring friend. We chased so many intense storms, and I wish we could have just one more storm chase. I'll miss you forever, Joel. We lost a legend pic.twitter.com/htN45t8wik
— Reed Timmer (@ReedTimmerAccu) January 24, 2018
More photos of legendary storm chaser Joel Taylor living life. Miss him so much already. #RIPJoel pic.twitter.com/pec9rqW2bY
— Reed Timmer (@ReedTimmerAccu) January 24, 2018
Others also paid tribute to Taylor on social media.
Horrible to hear that we've lost Joel Taylor today. One of the kindest chasers I've met - he was more than happy to take a picture with a star-struck nerd back in 2014. He will be missed. pic.twitter.com/vm1HCvuBAS
— Sean Ernst (@Sean_Ernst_Wx) January 24, 2018
The weather world is a little darker tonight. #RIP Joel Taylor. pic.twitter.com/506UrSnIr1
— RobertHahnVNL (@RobertHahnVNL) January 24, 2018
Another great chaser gone too soon. We are deeply saddened to hear that Joel Taylor, a person who had a huge passion for storm chasing, has passed away at the age of 38. Please keep his family in your prayers. #chaseon
— Echo Top Chasers (@EchoTopChasers) January 24, 2018
I was lucky enough to meet Joel a few years ago at Reed's wedding. He was so kind to me and we got to hang out for a bit during those few days. I snapped this photo of him and that just seemed like who he was. A huge smile. RIP Joel Taylor...you will be so missed. pic.twitter.com/mZI5eHzhKG
— Mike Olbinski (@MikeOlbinski) January 24, 2018
"One of the kindest chasers I've met -- he was more than happy to take a picture with a star-struck nerd back in 2014," one fan wrote. "He will be missed."
The Discovery network has not commented on Taylor's death.
