How we make Vox
January 4  What we’ve learned from our Facebook community for Obamacare enrollees
 By Lauren Katz 
 Last month, Vox launched a Facebook group for enrollees to talk about their shared experience.
 
 
  January 3  A note on Vox leadership changes and 2017
 How Vox is changing to cover Trump and a new era of policy and politics.
 
 
  July 22  Is the media becoming a wire service?
 Is the golden age of media innovation over before it's even begun?
 
 
  April 13  How Vox aggregates
 A look into how we aggregate, why we aggregate, and what we're trying to achieve.
 
 
  April 7  Happy Voxiversary!
 One year ago today, we started to put web content online all day, every day. Thank you for joining the ride.
 
 
  January 15  Refreshing the evergreen
 By Matthew Yglesias 
 How and why we're trying to find a better way to use our past work.
 
 
  January 1  Thank you for a great 2014!
 By Melissa Bell 
 It was a busy year. We published over 7,000 articles, almost 100 videos, 30 editorial apps, 150 features, and built over 30 storytelling tools. Here are a few of my favorite.
 
 
  December 9  Vox shirts are now available
 Now you can have your very own Vox t-shirt or sweatshirt.
 
 
  September 22  How we updated our teen birth rate feature
 By Sarah Kliff 
 We want the story to the be best single resource for our readers to explore a complex subject
 
 
  April 11  Ezra Klein voxsplains Vox in New York magazine
 By Matthew Yglesias 
 Joe Coscarelli interviews Vox.com editor in chief Ezra Klein for New York magazine about the philosophy behind our site. Ezra explains that journalism focused on readers' needs and interests won't necessarily cater to the tastes of other media pros.
 
 
  April 8  Correcting and updating card stacks
 By Matthew Yglesias 
 Rather than mucking up the cards with lots of annotations, each stack should have an updates card at the end.
 
 
  April 8  How come the links in charts don't work?
 By Matthew Yglesias 
 We had to choose between mobile-friendly charts and interactive charts, and we decided to prioritize mobile.
 
 
  April 6  Welcome to Vox: a work in progress
 We are very excited to be launching a website today, but we are even more excited about the improvements we'll be making to the site in the weeks and months to come.
 
 
  March 9  Nine questions about Vox
 Ezra Klein, Melissa Bell and Matt Yglesias answer nine questions about their new site Vox.com. Question #2: What happened to Project X?
