A teen’s T-shirt said ‘Deport Racists.’ His school edited the words out of a photo.
January 23 at 3:20 PM 
 Congratulations to our FHS Scholastic Art and Writing award recipients! pic.twitter.com/JsgHzla7dw
 — fhsnews (@fhsnews14) January 19, 2018
Officials at Fridley High School in Minnesota tweeted a photo of students who won art and writing awards — but only after removing two words from the T-shirt of one of the teens: “Deport Racists.” After the student went public on Twitter, school officials apologized.
(You can see the whole story in tweets below.)
The incident occurred last week after the school tweeted the photo. It came with a message about the school’s performance at the annual Minnesota Scholastic Arts Award, in which Fridley won 22 total awards:
Congratulations to our FHS Scholastic Art and Writing Awards recipients!
Student Chris Vazquez was one of the students in the photo, shown wearing a plain white T-shirt. He responded with his own tweet, saying that his T-shirt did not resemble the one he had put on that morning. He tweeted:
i don’t recall myself owning a white t shirt. The shirt actually said ‘deport racists,’ and I would love to know whose decision it was to edit my shirt.
In another tweet, he said:
 FHS claims to be a school that celebrated diversity of opinion, yet censors something expressing an anti-racist viewpoint.
After tens of thousands of people retweeted him, the school issued an apology in a tweet, saying in part:
We sincerely apologize for the miscommunication and frustration that yesterday’s post caused our students.
A message attached to the tweet said the “Deport Racists” message on the T-shirt was removed because officials at the school wanted to keep the focus “solely” on the awards and said officials regret doing it.
School officials did not immediately return requests for comment.
After the incident became public, a clothing website called GreenBoxShop.com, which sells clothes with social justice messages, had a Twitter giveaway to 20 Fridley students. The shirts say “Deport Racists.”
Here’s the whole story in tweets:
 Congratulations to our FHS Scholastic Art and Writing award recipients! pic.twitter.com/JsgHzla7dw
 — fhsnews (@fhsnews14) January 19, 2018
 i don’t recall myself owning a white t shirt.
 The shirt actually said “deport racists” and i would love know whose decision it was to edit my shirt. https://t.co/BnM69OQcDi
 — chris (@chrisvazquezx) January 19, 2018
 FHS claims to be a school that celebrates diversity of opinion, yet censors something expressing an anti-racist viewpoint
 — chris (@chrisvazquezx) January 19, 2018
 We sincerely apologize for the miscommunication and frustration that yesterday's post caused our students. Please read the attached message. pic.twitter.com/svEbDJhcA1
 — fhsnews (@fhsnews14) January 19, 2018
 #FridleyHighSchool t-shirt giveaway!
retweet for a chance to win a “DEPORT RACISTS” shirt in your size. 
We are giving 20 shirts to 20 FHS students to wear.
STUDENTS SHOULD NOT BE CENSORED FOR DENOUNCING RACISM & HATE pic.twitter.com/f15EQKuxyj
 — DEPORT RACISTS (@GreenBoxShop_) January 19, 2018
Close
Now Playing
