He terrorized Tampa with a series of killings, officials say. Now they want the death penalty.
January 23 at 5:51 PM 

Hillsborough State Attorney Andrew Warren announces on Tuesday he will seek the death penalty against Howell Emanuel Donaldson III. (Monica Herndon/The Tampa Bay Times via AP)
State officials in Florida said Tuesday that they will seek the death penalty for the suspect in a string of four killings that unsettled the city of Tampa last year, if he is convicted of the crime.
The prosecutor, Hillsborough State Attorney Andrew Warren, made the announcement at a news conference on Tuesday.
“The law is clear, the death penalty is reserved for the most aggravated and least mitigated capital offenses.” Warren said, according to the Tampa Bay Times. “This case, in which the defendant murdered four innocent victims, in a cold, calculated and pre-meditated manner, qualifies.”
Howell Emanuel Donaldson III, 24, is charged with four counts of first-degree murder for the deaths. He was arrested on Nov. 28 after weeks of uncertainty in the case left the city on edge and stoked fears that a serial killer was on the loose. The first three victims, Benjamin Mitchell, 22, an aspiring musician and community college student, Monica Hoffa, a 32-year-old waitress, and Anthony Naiboa, a 20-year-old walking home from the bus, were killed within a one-mile radius of each other in the Seminole Heights neighborhood over 11 days in October. About a month later, Ronald Felton, 60, was found dead in the street near where the other killings had occurred.
Police said that they were tipped off to Donaldson when a co-worker of his at McDonald’s called to report that he had shown him a handgun in a bag. The police said that ballistic evidence connected the gun to the four crime scenes.
Law enforcement officials have not described a motive for the crimes, at least publicly. Warren said that the case called for the death penalty because it involved four innocent victims who were killed in a “cold, calculated and premeditated manner.”
The families of the victims have divergent opinions about the potential for the death penalty in the case, the Times reported.
Felton’s sister Tina told the Times that she was personally opposed to the death penalty because of her Christian faith. But she noted that others in her family feel differently.
She said that she thought Warren was “listening to the families and going by what they say, but that’s not what I want for my brother,” Felton said.
Naiboa’s father Casimer Naiboa told the Times that he supported the decision because of his belief that the death penalty acts as a deterrent.
“He’s sending a message,” Naiboa said. “If people are going to start shooting people at random, they’re going to pay the highest punishment.”
The office of Public Defender Julianne Holt, who is representing Donaldson, declined to comment on the case.

This file booking photo provided by the Tampa Police Department, Fla. shows Howell Emanuel Donaldson III. (Tampa Police Department via AP, File)
Warren said that he had notified Florida Gov. Rick Scott (R) about the decision.
“The governor wished me well in the prosecution of the case and offered his support to do whatever he can to support the victims and their families,” Warren said.
Three people were put to death, all by lethal injection, in the last six months of 2017 in Florida, which is one of a handful of states that has turned to novel drug combinations as pharmaceutical companies have increasingly refused to supply their products for use in executions.
Executions in the state were suspended in 2016 after the Supreme Court found its system unconstitutional because it allowed judges, not juries, to make the final decision about capital sentences. Juries in the state now must now unanimously agree that a case warrants a death sentence.
Warren predicted that it would likely be “a few years” before Donaldson’s trial would take place. The prosecutor has a mixed record on seeking the death penalty, the Times reported.
While some state prosecutors, like Aramis Ayala in Orlando, have declined to pursue the death penalty at all, Warren has sought capital punishment in at least three cases. He has also withdrawn from that position in other cases he inherited when he was elected as the county’s top prosecutor last year.
Several of those cases involved defendants with mental health issues or intellectual disabilities, the Times reported.
Donaldson’s parents, Rosita and Howell, have been charged with civil contempt related to their son’s murder case, because officials say they have refused to answer questions from prosecutors about their son, the Times reported.
“We believe Mr. and Mrs. Donaldson have valuable information that can shed light on the defendant’s actions and his motives, and as much as I empathize with their terrible situation, they have a legal duty to provide that information,” Warren said. “The community deserves that information and frankly we owe it to the victims’ families to seek it.”
Read more:
