Murdoch blocked for now from taking over Sky by British regulator fearing ‘too much control’
January 23 at 7:38 AM 

 Rupert Murdoch on Sept. 10, 2017. (Julio Cortez/AP) 
British regulators said on Tuesday that Rupert Murdoch’s bid for a takeover of European broadcaster Sky would give his family trust “too much control over news providers in the UK across all media platforms . . . and therefore too much influence over public opinion and the political agenda.”
The latest takeover bid from 21st Century Fox, offering $16.3 billion for British broadcaster Sky, is now in question even though the final decision is in the hands of the British government. The deal may also still be pursued if amendments are made, such as spinning off or selling Sky’s 24/7 news channel or ensuring its editorial independence. Sky had previously threatened to shut its news channel should Britain block the deal, following a previous, failed takeover attempt of the broadcaster by Murdoch in 2011.
Sky News has been on air for almost three decades and has viewers across Britain and other parts of the world, claiming to reach over 100 million viewers worldwide.
Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox already controls 39 percent of Sky and is seeking to take over the remaining 61 percent. A detailed report to the government is expected in May, and Britain’s culture secretary has yet to make a final decision.
Entertainment conglomerate Disney — which is set to take over parts of Fox in the United States — may pursue Murdoch’s Sky plans at some point in the future.
The provisional move by Britain’s Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) is already being seen as a rare challenge to a family media empire that controls 21st Century Fox and NewsCorp, the publisher of several major British papers, including respected brands such as the Times and the country’s best-selling Sun newspaper. But CMA did not base its provisional decision on concerns that a Fox takeover may have infringed upon broadcasting standards, even though Murdoch critics pointed to a long list of scandals at Murdoch-owned media outlets, both in Britain and elsewhere. While CMA called those concerns “serious,” the ethics scandals did not directly impact Tuesday's announcement, it said.
Advising against the takeover for ethics reasons would have resulted in far bigger problems for the Murdoch family, likely closing the door for a future deal with Sky and raising further doubts over Murdoch’s management of his global news empire.
Its decision to provisionally discourage the takeover to defend media plurality was still applauded on social media. Former head of the opposition Labour party, Ed Miliband, referred to the decision as a “landmark finding” on Twitter, writing: “The Sky deal would give the Murdochs too much power. Finally a regulator says No to the Murdochs.”
“This is the right decision for the UK,” wrote Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy head.
The 86-year-old Melbourne-born Australian American media mogul has frequently commented on British politics in the past, mainly to support those in favor of leaving the European Union.
“UK Brexit campaign gathers force as government makes obviously false claims aimed at scaring voters. Early days yet,” Murdoch wrote on Twitter in March 2016, three months before a referendum that resulted in Britain voting to leave the European Union. The Sun newspaper was among the country's most pro-Brexit papers and has been credited for helping to facilitate the Leave campaign’s victory. But his Twitter feed also indicates that Murdoch followed Britain’s perception of what was unfolding in the United States at the time. “London elites, media, etc sneering at Trump, others. No understanding of mid-America conditions or politics,” he wrote in December 2015.
The media mogul also took to Twitter when British left-wing newspaper the Independent decided to cease printing in February 2016, writing: “Sadly UK’s Independent print paper closes after about 30 years,” Murdoch wrote at the time.
“Any loss of diversity bad,” he added.
Read more:
