Kevin B. Blackistone
USA Gymnastics needs to blow things up and start over with a safe, fresh foundation
Amid continued revelations of sexual assault, the federation should self-impose a penalty by withdrawing from the next world championships and Olympics until its house is razed and rebuilt properly.
Jan 23, 2018

Before Trump blasted Haiti, an NBA player went on a hunger strike for its people
Before Colin Kaepernick took a knee, Pistons center Olden Polynice stopped eating — during the NBA season — to protest how the Clinton administration was treating Haitians seeking asylum in the U.S.
Jan 13, 2018

Paying athletes would break college sports? Never before has that been more hypocritical.
Just look at some of these college football coaching contracts going around.
Dec 14, 2017

Where is Kaepernick on ladder of politicized athletes? It’s too early to say.
The onetime quarterback’s appearance this month on the cover of GQ is an example of the stylization of black resistance, but how we remember him is yet to be determined.
Nov 17, 2017

Bob McNair, other NFL owners demonstrate their true intent: Controlling black athletes
By using the word ‘inmates,’ Texans owner subconsciously expressed a desire to corral the players and return them to their place.
Oct 29, 2017

Trump is using black NFL players as political pawns
The president’s reality is calculatedly one-dimensional.
Oct 15, 2017

NFL owners wouldn’t give Colin Kaepernick a job. Now they’ve co-opted his movement.
What Colin Kaepernick birthed as a protest against the unchecked extrajudicial killing of black men has been co-opted by mostly white owners into dinner theater.
Sep 26, 2017

Houston spent massively on new stadiums, not its aging dams. As Harvey proved, that was a very bad choice.
Over the past decades, the city and its taxpayers have built new stadiums for the Texans, Astros, Rockets and Dynamo while its two World War II-era dams fell into disrepair.
Sep 5, 2017

Dick Gregory’s comedy made him famous. His diet helped make Riddick Bowe a boxing champ
Boxing promoter Rock Newman recalls how the comic’s ‘roots and garlic’ played a role in the 1992 win over Evander Holyfield.
Aug 21, 2017
NBA season preview with Kevin Blackistone
Columnist Kevin Blackistone answers your questions about the upcoming NBA season.
Oct 27, 2015
