Twitter Nation distracted by president’s tan suit
August 29, 2014 

 This is a tan suit. It is being worn by President Barack Obama while he spoke in the White House Briefing Room Thursday. (AFP/Mandel Ngan/Getty) 
[Update: Aug. 29, 12:05 p.m.] White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest just said, "The president stands squarely behind the decision he made yesterday to wear his summer suit."
[Original post] President Obama wore a tan suit on Thursday while talking about Ukraine and the Islamic State, and political Twitter promptly went nuts. Over the suit. You see, Obama has a tendency to wear gray or blue suits.
"You'll see I wear only gray or blue suits," Obama told Vanity Fair in 2012. "I'm trying to pare down decisions. I don't want to make decisions about what I’m eating or wearing. Because I have too many other decisions to make." But this suit was TAN. So, what message is he trying to send exactly? We consulted our in-house fashion expert -- Pulitzer prize winner Robin Givhan -- to answer just that question. "There is nothing wrong with that suit – well, except it’s a little big," Givhan said. "As they always are." She added:
It says more about official, federal, political Washington that anything other than a dark suit with a white shirt and red tie counts as some sort of aesthetic heresy. That is a conservative two-button suit in a color that is perfectly appropriate for the time of year and the occasion. This was not a 'formal' news conference. Honestly, people are responding like he showed up in Pharrell Williams' short suit. I'm appalled by the Twitter feeds.
 President Obama said Thursday that Russia is more isolated now than any time since the Cold War, siting Russian President Vladimir Putin's inability to solve the conflict in Ukraine diplomatically. This comes after Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatensyuk said Russian troops have entered Ukraine and are working with separatists east of Donetsk. (AP) 
The Twitter, you say? Well, yes, political Twitter did have a mini meltdown over the suit.
 The Audacity of Taupe http://pic.twitter.com/3EC7NN0By8 — Jared Keller (@jaredbkeller) August 28, 2014 
More than 4,000 tweets were posted about Obama's suit during that press conference pic.twitter.com/uyKoUrZlNy — Kia Makarechi (@Kia_Mak) August 28, 2014
Obama’s tan suit is twitter GOLD pic.twitter.com/OPHhSXBZZZ — Arthur Delaney (@ArthurDelaneyHP) August 28, 2014
 This is what happens when Obama bypasses Congress to purchase a suit. — Philip Klein (@philipaklein) August 28, 2014 
 Obama vows to defeat whoever made him wear this suit. pic.twitter.com/zoqj7OVFRe — Josh Barro (@jbarro) August 28, 2014 
And, it also -- wait for it -- inspired some parodies.
President Obama is here to sell you tornado insurance pic.twitter.com/RYeWlKAm79 — Jared Keller (@jaredbkeller) August 28, 2014
 Here you go. RT @iowahawkblog Quick, somebody photoshop a Century 21 or ABC Sports patch on that jacket pic.twitter.com/zm79QmBLBV — Scott Lofquist (@ScottLofquist) August 28, 2014 
 Obama better do it in this easter suit. — Tracy Clayton (@brokeymcpoverty) August 28, 2014 
 Now that we know Pres. Obama rocks church suits, we're gonna start calling him "Brother Obama." pic.twitter.com/WIr4XcnIN2 — britni danielle (@BritniDWrites) August 28, 2014 
 And you may find yourself in a beautiful Oval Office... pic.twitter.com/m7N8DDQrZe — Doktor Zoom (@DoktorZoom) August 28, 2014 
 “yes this is @mattyglesias suit please no more suit questions" pic.twitter.com/SMSA6f3QFN — darth™ (@darth) August 28, 2014 
 Not everyone hated the look, though.
I see no problem with the suit. pic.twitter.com/ZFFt75FedU — John Dingell (@john_dingell) August 28, 2014
I'm normally a fan of Obama but that was a very weak Obama speech and press conference. Only strong suit was his suit. — Nicholas Kristof (@NickKristof) August 28, 2014
So, what really was the meaning behind all this? Per @BarackTanSuit (before the account was suspended):

 Most Read Politics
