With help from a mysterious doctor, Tom Brady found a secret weapon
January 23 at 8:14 AM 

 Let’s go to the tape. (Robert Deutsch/USA Today) 
Was it the avocado ice cream? The electrolytes? The gallons of water he consumes daily?
Nope. It was the tape, a big hunk of black tape, that helped Tom Brady play in the AFC championship game despite a cut on his passing hand that required 12 stitches. It might have looked like electrical tape, but this was something called KT Tape, a kinesiology tape designed to relieve pain and support muscles, tendons and ligaments, rather than his line of dietary products that came through in the clutch.
How it came to rest on the golden hand of the NFL’s best quarterback is a wild story.
Last Thursday, Jacki Cassady, KT Tape’s marketing brand manager, was working a booth at a conference for professional baseball athletic trainers in Glendale, Ariz., when a man claiming to be a doctor approached her and said that he knew a New England Patriots player who needed tape to cover his thumb while allowing him to flex his hand. The doctor cut a strip of tape in half and tested it on his thumb, with an assistant taking photos.
“That was a pretty specific request, and the fact that he wanted to take pictures and sent them back to a trainer — a lot of times when people want tape they want an actual application, but that wasn’t an actual application because he didn’t really want it,” Cassady told Boston’s WEEI. “If it was a wrist wrap it would have had two strips and it would have gone around the wrist, so it was a very specific request.”

 All hail the tape. (David J. Phillip/AP) 
And a mysterious one as well. The doctor, as he left the booth, mysteriously told Cassady, “Watch the games on Sunday and see if you see your product.”
Getting the tape to New England and onto the cut that Brady sustained in a fluke collision with a teammate on Wednesday was critical. Luckily, Ed Terris, KT Tape’s vice president of sales, was in Philadelphia and sent out a package containing black Pro Extreme tape and blister patches, which can be applied before the tape.
By Saturday, the package was in Foxborough. By Sunday, it was visible to everyone on Brady’s hand as he completed 26 of 38 passes for 290 yards (including 138 in the Patriots’ fourth-quarter rally) and two touchdowns in a victory that will take him to the Super Bowl for the eighth time in his career. It isn’t clear at the moment whether KT Tape’s big moment will continue in Super Bowl LII on Feb. 4 because Brady said Monday that he expects the stitches will be removed this week. Neither the team nor Brady has spoken about the tape and how much it contributed to his game, but he did admit Monday that the injury was serious and “didn’t look good there for a little bit. … The timing and where exactly it was wasn’t the best thing in the world for a quarterback, but it is what it is.”
Kinesiology tape has been around since the 1970s, but came into prominence during the 2008 Summer Olympics when U.S. beach volleyball player Kerri Walsh and other Olympians used it. It formerly had to be applied by medical professionals, but now KT Tape has gone mainstream, with Taylor West, the company’s marketing vice president, telling sporttechie.com‘s Joe Lemire that it controls 80 percent of the retail market share.
Just what makes this tape so special? The company’s website says it reduces lymphatic fluid that builds up and causes inflammation, pressure, pain and swelling after injury or overuse. “It is believed that when applied correctly, KT Tape lifts the skin, decompressing the layers of fascia, allowing for greater movement of lymphatic fluid which transports white blood cells throughout the body and removes waste products, cellular debris, and bacteria.”
Although some of its tapes are made entirely of cotton fibers, the company says it also makes a tape of “highly engineered, ultra-durable synthetic fabric with 30 percent stronger elastic cores. Both the cotton and synthetic materials create unidirectional elasticity which allows the tape to stretch in length but not in width. As a result, the elastic fibers provide stable support without restricting range of motion like a traditional rigid athletic tape.” It also allows for moisture release.
All of which would be helpful for a 40-year-old quarterback who suffered a bad cut at a bad time. Who knows? Maybe the mysterious doctor will end up with a Super Bowl ring out of this.
“We’ll get to the bottom of it,” Cassady promised.
Read more from The Post:
