Disappointed advocates rally, vent while ‘dreamers’ hang in the balance
Dozens rallied outside the U.S. Capitol on Monday after the Senate struck a deal to end the government shutdown. (Marvin Joseph/The Washington Post) 
 January 23 at 1:01 PM 
In the hours after U.S. senators struck a deal to end the government shutdown Monday, scores of immigrant advocates gathered near the U.S. Capitol to protest what they saw as the Democrats’ decision to abandon the “dreamers,” young undocumented immigrants brought to the United States as children.
One by one, they called out the names of Democrats who voted with Republicans to end the shutdown, shouting, “Shame!”
On Tuesday, the protesters will be back, rallying in Upper Senate Park and then visiting lawmakers’ offices to demand the vote on immigration legislation that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) has vaguely promised.
“Senators who voted today for the promise of a symbolic vote on the Dream Act are not resisting Trump — they are enablers,” Cristina Jiménez, executive director and co-founder of United We Dream, the nation’s largest immigrant-youth-led organization, said Monday. “Republicans played games too, holding the Dream Act hostage and pitted the safety of immigrant youth against children’s health care, proving their cruelty to the world.”
 “Dreamers” and their advocates gather near the U.S. Capitol on Monday to declare their frustration at the reopening of the federal government without protections for immigrants. (Marvin Joseph/The Washington Post) 
Since the Trump administration announced in September that it would phase out the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, immigrants and their advocates have held rallies, flooded the offices of U.S. lawmakers and been arrested in acts of civil disobedience, all in an effort to force a vote on legislation that would allow dreamers to stay legally in the United States.
Senate Democrats, led by Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (N.Y.), forced a government shutdown last week, refusing to support a last-minute spending bill if it did not include protections for dreamers.
But by Monday, after a weekend of Republican claims that Democrats had “prioritized illegal immigrants over American citizens,” senators from swing states were telling Schumer that their stance could hurt them, badly, in November’s midterm elections.
The Democrats then accepted a deal they had rejected Sunday — agreeing to reopen the government as long as McConnell said “it would be my intention” to consider immigration legislation in coming weeks.
There are multiple competing efforts in both chambers of Congress to determine what such legislation would say, however. And even if a bill allowing dreamers to stay passed the Senate, it could face an uphill battle in the more conservative House.
A federal judge in California has temporarily blocked the Trump administration’s plans to end the program, which was serving about 690,000 young people when Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced its demise.
The administration has resumed accepting renewal applications, but is also asking the Supreme Court to allow it to dismantle DACA.
Dreamers whose protections expire would lose their permission to reside and work legally in the United States and would be at risk of deportation.
“I feel let down,” Antonio Jauregui, 20, of Fresno, Calif., said outside the Capitol on Monday.
A political science student at Fresno City College, Jauregui migrated from Mexico with his grandfather when he was 5. He has few memories of his native country and has never visited. He lost his DACA protection late last year after missing an Oct. 5 deadline for a final renewal because of a postal delay.
Advocates excoriated Republicans for failing to broker a deal and vowed to continue lobbying until an agreement is reached.
“Last week, I was moved to tears of joy when Democrats stood up and fought for progressive values and for dreamers,” said Frank Sharry, executive director of America’s Voice, an advocacy organization. “Today, I am moved to tears of disappointment and anger that Democrats blinked.”
Close
Now Playing
