Teenager charged in robberies at four businesses in DC, police say
January 24 at 2:13 AM 
The 5500 block of Connecticut Avenue is lined with stores and restaurants, many of them just what might be found in any small town anywhere in America. It was on this homey block, last October, that two robbers, according to a police account, came in to one of the businesses and demanded money at gunpoint. 
They got it and fled, D.C. police said. On Tuesday the D.C. police announced that a male teenager from Northeast Washington had been arrested and charged with armed robbery in the holdup, which occurred Oct. 6 about 8 p.m. 
In the course of their investigation, police said, the 16-year-old was charged in three additional robberies of businesses, and one attempted robbery. Two of the robberies, and the robbery attempt occurred on the same day, according to police. 
One of those robberies occurred Jan. 2, in the 6500 block of Georgia Avenue NW about 1:30 a.m. Prescription medication was taken from behind a pharmacy counter, police said.
About two hours later on the same January morning, police said, two robbers took cash from a business in the 1100 block of Vermont Avenue NW. 
A little less than four hours after that, police said, at around 7:15 p.m., two would-be robbers went into a business in the 3600 block of 12th Street, in Northeast Washington. 
Again, police said, a pharmacy counter was the target. For reasons not immediately clear, the demand for prescription medications was not met. The would-be robbers left, police said. 
On Jan. 15, police said, about 2:40 o’clock in the afternoon, two robbers went into a business in the 5600 block of Georgia Avenue NW. Again, police said, the pharmacy counter was the target. One of the robbers jumped over the counter and took prescription medications, the police said. 
 In both of the holdups that occurred on Jan. 2, police said, two suspects were arrested by responding officers. In each of those two robberies, police said in a statement Tuesday, two robbers had fled the holdup scene in a car driven by a third person. 
Police said that the other three incidents remained under investigation
Close
Now Playing
