PM Update: Showers and some storms increasingly likely tonight into Tuesday
Through Tonight: Showers well to our west at publish time should slowly march this way through the evening and into the night. Odds of rain are fairly low before midnight, although a passing shower is possible. Showers are more likely after midnight, and a rumble is possible as well. Lows are in the upper 40s to mid-40s.
View the current conditions at The Washington Post.
Tomorrow (Tuesday): A cold front is headed through during the day, but before it does, we’ll be dealing with more showers, the chance of storms, and more highs in the 60s. It won’t take long to reach highs for the day, which are about low to mid-60s. While we’ll have limited instability for storms, strong dynamics could make up for it. The best odds for rumbles and perhaps some damaging winds seem to come in the morning or midday. See Jason and Jeff’s post for more details on that. Even without storms, we should see gusty winds with any showers, along with background sustained winds around 15 to 20 mph. Skies begin to clear late in the day as winds switch.
See Jason Samenow’s forecast through the weekend. And if you haven’t already, join us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter and Instagram. For related traffic news, check out Dr. Gridlock.
Central U.S. storm: The storm system threatening to send us some thunderstorms is a beauty.
 A mid-latitude cyclone in all its beauty. (Via @CIRA_CSU: https://t.co/QeT01vZniw) pic.twitter.com/BSjRp1agbt
 — Dakota Smith (@weatherdak) January 22, 2018
It has kicked up some severe weather over the South and Midwest, and it has caused some thundersnow in its cold-air region.
 #GOES16's Geostationary Lightning Mapper observing #lightning across northwest Iowa in mixed phase precip and heavy snowfall between 920 and 950 am. #Blizzard #iawx @NWSSiouxFalls @NWSDesMoines pic.twitter.com/PUJidZVk9w
 — Chris Schultz (@cschultzwx) January 22, 2018
Want our 5 a.m. forecast delivered to your email inbox? Subscribe here.
