Virginia Tech earns much-needed résumé-builder with win over North Carolina
Justin Bibbs goes up for a dunk during Virginia Tech’s 80-69 win over North Carolina. (Lauren Rakes/Getty Images) 
 January 22 at 10:32 PM 
 In need of a signature win to boost its NCAA tournament hopes and begin the climb out of the ACC’s bottom four, the Virginia Tech men’s basketball team put together one of its most complete performances of the season Monday night in dispatching 10th-ranked North Carolina, 80-69, at Cassell Coliseum.
Guard Justin Robinson led the charge with 19 points, making 3 of 5 three-pointers, in the Hokies’ first victory over a ranked opponent. Guard Ahmed Hill added 18 points on 8-for-12 shooting to help Virginia Tech end a two-game slide that had dropped it into a tie with Syracuse for third-to-last in the 15-team conference.
The Hokies (14-6, 3-4), playing on ESPN’s “Big Monday” television slate for the first time in program history, had lost seven in a row to the reigning national champions and 12 of their last 13 in the series.
“The thing I’m most grateful for is the effort that we played with, the energy that we played with, the fight that we played with,” Virginia Tech Coach Buzz Williams said. “I’m thankful that it happened at home for the people. It’s the first ‘Big Monday’ since we’ve lived here. 
“For our guys and our staff to have that opportunity, and to play with the gumption that we played with, I hope that it’s a sign of things to come.”
An announced crowd of 9,275 witnessed the Hokies grow the lead decisively to 64-51 with 7:48 left in the second half courtesy of a 13-3 run. Hill sparked the run with a three-pointer, part of Virginia Tech shooting 12 for 30 (40 percent) from beyond the arc, and scored the first seven points during the surge.
The margin expanded to 14 soon after, and the closest North Carolina came the rest of the way was within eight points. Virginia Tech then snuffed out that rally by scoring 10 of the next 12.
The Hokies, who shot 47.6 percent overall, entered the night leading the ACC in field goal percentage (52.1) and second in scoring offense (85.6 points per game). 
“I think our togetherness as a whole was back,” Robinson said. “Everybody was touching. Everybody was staying positive no matter what happened. Nobody dropped their heads. I just think us being back to who we were was a big part of what happened.”
Ball security and rebounding also factored in significantly to Williams’s first win against the Tar Heels since he took over at Virginia Tech. Williams had lost his first three meetings to North Carolina (16-5, 5-3) since arriving in 2014-15.
Virginia Tech committed nine turnovers for its second fewest in a conference game this season and forced 13, leading to an 11-2 advantage in points off turnovers.
Facing a minus-five deficit in rebounding at halftime, the Hokies chased missed shots with greater urgency thereafter, finishing ahead in that category, 36-35. They scored 11 points on second-chance points in the second half. The Tar Heels had none.
North Carolina, which had its four-game winning streak end, began the night in first place in the ACC in rebounding margin (plus-12.2).
“That was one of the main factors on the board for this game was to rebound,” Hill said, referring to instructions Williams etched on a chalkboard in the locker room. “They’re a great offensive rebounding team, and we know we had to get stops and had to get the rebound because once they get the rebound, they always kick it out for an open three.”
Trailing by seven late in the first half, Virginia Tech reeled off 18 of the final 22 points heading into intermission to lead 39-32. The last 12 of those resulted from four consecutive three-pointers, including Robinson’s contested shot from beyond the arc with five seconds to play.
The only points in that time for the Tar Heels, whose last trip to the commonwealth yielded a 61-49 loss to Virginia on Jan. 6, came on Luke Maye’s lay-in off an inbounds pass and Kenny Williams’s floater. The Tar Heels had opened a 21-14 lead on the heels of a 15-6 push featuring three straight three-pointers, two courtesy of Maye and the other by guard Joel Berry II.
Maye and Berry, the Tar Heels’ top two scorers, each finished with 23 points, but Berry needed 19 shots to get there. Berry, the most outstanding player in the last Final Four, committed a game-high five turnovers and shot 4 of 12 from three-point range.
“I feel the same way I did as the last time I was in Virginia,” North Carolina Coach Roy Williams said. “I think Buzz had his team much more ready to play than I had my team. They were much more aggressive physically, mentally into everything they were doing. Didn’t make enough plays. Didn’t have a good night shooting the ball.”
Close video player
Now Playing
