Maryland reasserts its dominance in Big Ten with statement win over Ohio State
Maryland guard Kaila Charles looks to pass against Ohio State. Charles finished with 32 points on 12-for-16 shooting against the Buckeyes. (Toni L. Sandys/The Washington Post) 
 January 22 at 9:16 PM 
If the Maryland women’s basketball team was going to reassert its dominance this season in the most competitive Big Ten the Terrapins have experienced since joining the league, a 99-69 upset of No. 12 Ohio State at home Monday night was a fine way to go about it. 
The timing of this game against the Buckeyes, who until a few weeks ago were the only conference opponent to have ever defeated the Terps in Big Ten play and who entered Monday’s game owning a three-game win streak in the series, was not ideal for Maryland. The young Terps had looked wobbly recently after losing second-leading scorer Blair Watson to injury on Jan. 10, and in their previous two games they had been upset by Michigan State and nearly beaten by 12th-place Indiana. 
But they rose to the challenge Monday against the Big Ten’s most efficient offense and its explosive leader Kelsey Mitchell, the second-best scorer in the nation averaging 25.3 points per game. 
With the win — their first over Ohio State (16-4, 5-2 Big Ten) since the 2014-15 season — the No. 14 Terrapins (17-3, 6-1) move into sole possession of first place in the Big Ten and secure the head-to-head tiebreaker in the teams’ only regular season meeting. 
Maryland also took a 6-5 edge in the series, which is fast becoming the league’s most exciting rivalry. 
The Terps played their most complete game all season and shot so well that the game was practically bookended by three-pointers that had the announced crowd of 7,944 — large enough that lines accumulated to enter Xfinity Center at multiple gates where usually few exist — on its feet. 
Sophomore Kaila Charles led an invigorated Maryland team with 32 points on 12-for-16 shooting and seven rebounds. Junior guard Eleanna Christinaki had 26 points, including six three-pointers, and eight rebounds. Senior Kristen Confroy had a team-high nine rebounds. 
The Terrapins ran through Ohio State’s defense, a concern for the Buckeyes all season despite their powerful offense, to shoot 54.9 percent from the field and 61.1 percent from the three-point line. Ohio State had an uncharacteristically off night offensively, shooting 39.2 percent from the field and 27.3 percent from three-point range. 
The highlight, as usual, was Mitchell, who scored 15 points. Her one three-pointer (on five attempts) was all she needed to break the record for most career threes by a woman in NCAA history across all divisions. The senior has 442 in her career. 
Maryland drilled Ohio State on offense from the start. Sparked by Christinaki’s five three-pointers, which led to 21 points in 12 first-half minutes from the Florida transfer, the Terrapins sprinted to a 50-35 lead at halftime. 
Maryland has been readjusting its offense since losing Watson to a torn right anterior cruciate ligament, but against the Buckeyes the Terrapins were as in sync as they have been all season and aggressive, working the Buckeyes’ defense from all over the floor. When Christinaki’s catch-and-shoot at the three-point line faltered, Stephanie Jones was under the basket for a putback.
The Terps shot 52.6 percent from the field in the first half and connected on 8 of 12 three-pointers as Ohio State, which owns the best scoring offense in the Big Ten, had an uncharacteristically slow first half.
The Buckeyes started 1 for 9 from the field as a few pesky good shots refused to fall, but they made up for some lost ground with five three-pointers. Mitchell, who had scored at least 30 points in her past two games against Maryland, had just nine at intermission. 
The Terrapins took a 20-point lead for the first time at the start of the fourth quarter thanks to Christinaki’s sixth three-pointer of the night, which was followed by a steal and fast-break layup from Brianna Fraser that had the crowd out of its seats. 
Close video player
Now Playing
