Maryland’s nightmare season continues as Bruno Fernando leaves loss to Indiana
Maryland's Kevin Huerter scrambles for a loose ball with Indiana’s Robert Johnson during the Terrapins’ 71-68 loss. (Darron Cummings/AP) 
 January 22 at 9:39 PM 
 It was a sight they had all seen before, on multiple occasions this season, but Maryland’s entire bench still froze as Bruno Fernando clutched his right ankle in pain on the Assembly Hall floor. They looked down in disbelief. Again? The freshman big man had already missed games this season with injuries to both ankles, and he finally looked like himself again Monday night against Indiana after an illness had weakened his body for a week. It was short-lived. 
Fernando eventually hobbled back to the locker room after appearing to reinjure his right ankle, and although Maryland trailed by just three at that moment, it seemed as if a terrible omen had set in for a snake-bitten roster. Yet, somehow, Maryland still had a chance to tie the game in the final seconds of a 71-68 loss, but Anthony Cowan Jr.’s three-point attempt clanked off the back of the iron with six seconds left, which left Maryland’s bench once again looking demoralized and threw the Terrapins’ postseason résumé into further disarray. 
Cowan finished with 18 points and Kevin Huerter added 16 points and 11 rebounds for the Terrapins (15-7, 4-5 Big Ten), who committed 18 turnovers overall and shot just 31 percent from the field in the second half. 
Maryland’s players had walked into Assembly Hall aware that this was the last Big Ten building their program had not won in since joining the league in 2014, although that was of little consequence. None of the starters had any memories of the previous two disastrous trips here. Of Monday’s starting five, which featured a slight wrinkle with the first career start for redshirt freshman Joshua Tomaic, only senior center Michal Cekovsky had played in this historic venue. And even his experience was only five meaningless minutes in a blowout loss to the Hoosiers during his freshman season three years ago. 
The more pressing matter was that Maryland needed to find a way to win a Big Ten game on the road; it had eked out one such victory in overtime at Illinois in early December but had since been blown out at Michigan State and Ohio State and lost after a late-game defensive breakdown at Michigan. Not only did Monday present a chance to beat a Hoosiers team that has elevated its play at home this season — Indiana entered the night 3-0 on its home floor in league play — but it would also help burnish the Terrapins’ postseason résumé and give them momentum ahead of Sunday’s home matchup against Michigan State. 
Indiana was bolstered by Juwan Morgan (25 points, five rebounds), the talented junior power forward whose status was uncertain after he suffered a left ankle injury in a loss to Michigan State last week. Morgan gave Maryland problems from the onset, and Indiana used a 6-0 run at the end of the first half to take a 42-39 lead into the locker room. Morgan was especially a load after Fernando went down with his ankle injury on a post move with 15:29 remaining in the second half.
Yet even after Maryland’s rotation was again cut down to eight scholarship players, the Terrapins stayed in position to win the rest of the way. As Indiana keyed on Cowan and Huerter, Maryland’s offense received a jolt from its bench, including from Jared Nickens (12 points), who hit a crucial three-pointer with 6:02 remaining to tie the game at 57. That was followed by a three-point play from freshman Darryl Morsell, who capped a 9-0 run to give Maryland a five-point lead with 4:53 left. 
But Maryland never had an answer for Morgan, who quickly answered Morsell’s finish with one of his own to help spur a 7-0 run as Indiana regained the lead. Morgan scored eight points in the final 4:39 alone. After a three-pointer by Nickens cut Maryland’s deficit to 67-66 with 1:06 remaining, Indiana guard Josh Newkirk missed two free throws after being fouled — but Morsell could not box Morgan out. Morgan grabbed the rebound and scored to push the lead back to three with 36 seconds left. 
Still, Maryland had a chance in the final seconds. After Newkirk hit two free throws to put Indiana up 71-68 with 15 seconds left, Cowan missed a potential game-tying three-pointer from the left perimeter. Huerter had a chance from half court after two more Indiana missed free throws with three seconds left, but his attempt fell well short. 
Close video player
Now Playing
