On Day 2, Democrats See Change In Mukasey
Attorney general nominee Michael B. Mukasey listens to a question from Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse (D-R.I.) during Mukasey's second day of testimony. (By Susan Walsh -- Associated Press) 
TOOLBOX



 "He's at least answered the questions, which is better than his predecessor," Leahy said, referring to the habit of Alberto R. Gonzales, who resigned last month as attorney general, of being unable to recall details or make clear declarations. "He's going to be different than Gonzales on all the issues, I think. He will certainly be better than Gonzales on morale." 
 Amid charges by lawmakers from both parties that Gonzales had inappropriately politicized the Justice Department, Mukasey drew bipartisan praise Wednesday for promising to resign rather than implement any policies that he believes violate the Constitution. But Mukasey also suggested that he would side with the Bush administration's views on presidential authority, a stance he made clearer yesterday. 
 Asked about executive privilege, a legal doctrine presidents have cited to avoid disclosing records related to their deliberations, Mukasey endorsed the administration's argument that it covers more than communications directly involving the president. He also said that it would be inappropriate, in a battle between Congress and the White House over access to such documents, for a U.S. attorney to pursue contempt charges against a White House official who is following the legal advice of the Justice Department in refusing access. 
 Several contempt citations were approved this summer by the House Judiciary Committee against current and former White House officials over their refusal to testify in the ongoing congressional investigations of the firings of nine U.S. prosecutors. Leahy suggested yesterday a "real probability" that more citations are on the way. 
 "It simply can't be appropriate for the same department that offered the opinion [allowing wide use of executive privilege] then to turn around and prosecute somebody who followed it," Mukasey said. 
 Some of the most tense exchanges at the hearing centered on whether the president must strictly abide by provisions of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, a 1978 law that governs clandestine spying in the United States. Mukasey suggested that the president can ignore a law, including the surveillance act, if it unduly impinges on his constitutional authority as commander in chief during wartime. 
 "The president is not putting somebody above the law; the president is putting somebody within the law," Mukasey said. "The president doesn't stand above the law. But the law emphatically includes the Constitution." 
 Leahy said he was "troubled" by the answer: "I see a loophole big enough to drive a truck through." 
 Sen. Russell Feingold (D-Wis.), who had questioned Mukasey on the same topic on Wednesday, complained that the nominee had gone from being "agnostic" to holding a "disturbing view." 
 "You've suggested that I've gone overnight from being an agnostic to being a heretic. . . . I haven't," Mukasey responded, though he did not elaborate. 
 Mukasey also amplified his opposition to a proposed federal shield law for journalists that the Judiciary Committee has already approved. The bill attracted bipartisan support after several high-profile cases in which reporters were jailed or threatened with contempt charges for refusing to divulge the identities of sources. 
 Mukasey said that the current system has worked "passably well" and that any problems could be solved by changes to internal Justice Department rules. He noted that he worked briefly as a wire service reporter and later represented media organizations as a lawyer in private practice, but he echoed Bush administration arguments that such a law could be used to protect journalists who are acting as spies or terrorists. 
 At one point, a flustered Leahy asked Mukasey "whether you received some criticism from anybody in the administration last night after your testimony," leading to a different set of answers at yesterday's hearing. 
 "I received no criticism," said Mukasey, who was measured and soft-spoken throughout his testimony. "I had dinner with my family last night." 
 Staff researcher Madonna Lebling contributed to this report. 
© 2007 The Washington Post Company
