Pakistani man threatens to sue CIA over alleged drone deaths
Washington Post Foreign Service 
 Tuesday, November 30, 2010 
 ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN - A Pakistani man who said two of his relatives were killed in a U.S. drone strike said Monday that he plans to sue the CIA in Pakistani courts for "wrongful death" if he is not compensated within two weeks, a move that could renew debate over the legality of the covert program. 
 Kareem Khan, a journalist from the semiautonomous Pakistani tribal area of North Waziristan, said he is seeking $500 million in damages from U.S. Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates, CIA Director Leon Panetta and the CIA station chief in this capital city. Khan said the strike killed his brother, his son and another man. He said they were not connected to Taliban or al-Qaeda militants who are based in the region and are the targets of regular CIA drone strikes. 
 The United States carries out drone strikes in the tribal areas with the cooperation of the Pakistani government, but neither nation publicly acknowledges the clandestine program, and it is unlikely that U.S. officials would cooperate with a court case. The attacks have increased sharply this year, and most have targeted militants in North Waziristan. 
 The strikes by the unmanned aircraft are controversial in Pakistan, where they are blamed for civilian casualties and characterized as a violation of national sovereignty. But victims rarely come forward, and danger and government travel restrictions in the tribal belt make it all but impossible to investigate such claims independently. Speaking anonymously, U.S. and many Pakistani officials insisted that the strikes are precise. 
 Legal experts and human rights activists are divided on the legality of drone strikes, but some say those involved could be held responsible in court for errant attacks. In congressional testimony in April, Loyola Law School professor David Glazier said those remotely operating CIA drones could be "liable to prosecution under the law of any jurisdiction where attacks occur for any injuries, deaths or property damage they cause." 
 But Khan's effort would probably face long odds: Successfully suing the CIA for counterterrorism operations has been difficult in U.S. courts, let alone overseas. 
 CIA spokesman George Little declined to comment Monday on Khan's claim. 
 Khan said his brother and 18-year-old son, both teachers, were killed when a U.S. missile struck Khan's home in the town of Mir Ali. A mason who was staying with them was also killed, he said. Khan said he was in Islamabad at the time of the attack. 
 His attorney, Mirza Shahzad Akbar, provided reporters blurred photos of deceased men he said were Khan's son and brother, but he had no photos of the damaged house. 
 "My client is a victim of naked aggression by the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States," Akbar said. 
 Khan said he would file civil and criminal suits in Pakistan against CIA officials if he is not compensated within two weeks. Because CIA officials who work in Pakistan on the drone-strike program do not have diplomatic immunity and are not military members, Akbar said, they could be prosecuted for murder as civilians. 
 Hussain is a special correspondent. Staff writer Greg Miller in Washington contributed to this report. 
© 2010 The Washington Post Company
