Man arrested in N.J. after he enters home and lives under bed in spare bedroom for 3 days
July 24, 2015 

 Jason Hubbard was arrested on May 10, 2015. (Spotswood Police Department) 
Remember that childhood legend about the boogeyman under the bed? Well, it turned out to be all too real for a New Jersey couple.
Jason Hubbard was arrested and charged with criminal trespass, burglary and theft of services, the Spotswood, N.J., police department said in a Facebook post, after he allegedly entered a home in May and lived under the bed in a spare bedroom for three days, while he charged four cellphones with an electrical outlet under the bed.
Hubbard allegedly entered the home through an open door on May 7 when one of the occupants was taking out the garbage, police said. Hubbard apparently remained under the bed in the spare bedroom until May 10 when a homeowner heard a noise in the spare bedroom. Upon looking under the bed, the homeowner discovered Hubbard and “immediately called police.”
“He used to date my daughter five years ago,” Margaret Adamcewicz told WABC 7. “It didn’t end well…He didn’t say why he came back.”
Adamcewicz, 52, told the TV station her husband found Hubbard under the bed in their daughter’s former bedroom. Adamcewicz’s husband called the police on the evening of May 10 and the couple’s 28-year-old son kept an eye on Hubbard until police arrived.
“I don’t think he was eating,” Adamcewicz told WABC 7. “I think he just had water under the bed.”
“He didn’t say why he came back,” she also said, “He just picked our house to hide out in. He didn’t have a home to live in.”
Adamcewicz said she had not heard from Hubbard in five years, but she has a message for him nearly three months after his bizarre, multi-day cellphone-charging break-in at her home: “stay away from this house and never come back.”
“I wasn’t scared,” Adamcewicz also told the station. “I was just angry.”
Hubbard has been in jail since the incident on $50,000 bail, the Associated Press reported; it is not known if he has an attorney. Hubbard’s age and town of residence are also unknown, according to NJ.com.
In its statement earlier this week about Hubbard’s arrest, Spotswood police noted that the charge for “theft of services” related to the electrical current Hubbard had apparently used during the three days he was allegedly charging a handful of cellphones under the bed.
Close
Now Playing
