Maybe not a women’s basketball rivalry, but Maryland-Ohio State is a big game
Kaila Charles and the Terrapins are a relatively young team and will face one of the more experienced teams in the country in Ohio State. (Toni L. Sandys/The Washington Post) 
 January 21 at 5:26 PM 
Both Maryland women’s basketball Coach Brenda Frese and Ohio State women’s basketball Coach Kevin McGuff are hesitant to call the series a rivalry. 
After all, the history between their programs is relatively short — the Terrapins and Buckeyes will meet for just the 11th time Monday — and the series has been lopsided the past two years. The Terps beat Ohio State twice in the 2014-15 season, but the Buckeyes have won the three meetings since. 
Rivalry or not, it’s hard to deny the importance of Monday night’s game, when No. 14 Maryland (16-3, 5-1 Big Ten) hosts No. 8 Ohio State (16-3, 5-1) at Xfinity Center in the only regular season meeting between the teams. The game pits the Buckeyes, who were picked to win the conference this year, against a Maryland team whose three-year reign in the Big Ten looks more tenuous than ever. 
“I see it as a blooming rivalry because when they play, it’s for the title typically,” said Debbie Antonelli, who is calling the game for ESPN as a part of the network’s “Big Monday” coverage. “There’s so much on the line when they meet. It’s not just about the Big Ten and Big Ten tournament seeding; it’s about NCAA implications as well. And Maryland needs a quality win on their résumé. Ohio State has some.” 
The postseason implications of Monday’s game were made clear when the NCAA Division I women’s basketball committee released the first of its regular season top 16 rankings Thursday. 
Ohio State, which has two good wins over a ranked Stanford team, was included at No. 10. Maryland, which has won the Big Ten regular season and conference title the past three years, was left off the list.
“I feel very strongly about the winner of this game getting an advantage,” Antonelli said. 
For Maryland, the timing of this game makes a difficult test even tougher. 
Frese’s Terps are adjusting after losing second-leading scorer Blair Watson, who tore her right anterior cruciate ligament Jan. 10 and is out for the season. 
 Michigan State beat them Jan. 11 to become the first Big Ten team other than Ohio State to knock off Maryland since the Terps joined the conference. On Tuesday, the Terps barely escaped an upset bid from Indiana, which sits 12th in the 14-team conference. 
“This is the first time we’re playing them and we are the underdogs, so we’re pretty excited,” senior guard Kristen Confroy said before practice Friday. “Obviously, we’ve had some changes to our team and are really working through finding a new rhythm and finding what we need for the rest of the season and getting into tournament time. We’re excited. We know it’s going to be a big test. They’re a great team. All five positions can give us a run for our money.”
Ohio State leads the Big Ten in scoring offense thanks to a talented corps of shooters led by Kelsey Mitchell, the senior guard from Cincinnati who was picked as the league’s preseason player of the year. 
Mitchell averages 25.3 points, which is second best in the nation, and while Mitchell is the most dangerous player, the Buckeyes have a balanced offense, albeit not as evenly dispersed as Maryland. Ohio State has four scorers averaging in double figures, while Maryland has six, not including Watson. Still, the Buckeyes’ shooters have been a concern for Terps players in the days leading up to the game. 
“I think in the past they could shoot,” Confroy said, “but they really were looking to get to the rim and create for drive and drops or whatever it may be. But now I know all their guards and even some of their bigs can knock it down from three consistently.” 
What Frese is concerned with is Ohio State’s other strength: The Buckeyes may be the most experienced team in the country. McGuff’s starting lineup consists of two seniors, two redshirt seniors and a redshirt junior. He has a single freshman and two sophomores on his 11-woman roster. 
The disparity between Frese’s young rotation — the Terps start a true freshman at point guard, and sophomore Kaila Charles is their leading scorer — and Ohio State’s veteran roster is a factor. After the Michigan State game, Frese told her team she had felt a loss was coming. They hadn’t put complete, 40-minute games together often during the nonconference schedule, and she felt Maryland had a lot of growing up to do. 
“That’s what keeps me awake at night is they’re a veteran-led group,” Frese said of Ohio State. 
Confroy said the timing of the Michigan State loss and the Indiana game might have been good for the younger players to help them understand both the changing landscape in the Big Ten and the quality of play required to beat a team such as Ohio State. 
“My freshman year was our first year in the Big Ten. We went undefeated in the Big Ten, and then up to Michigan State, Ohio State was the only team to knock us off,” Confroy said. “So I understood. . . . I think the upperclassmen who have been through that the whole way understand that [the rest of the league] is going to give us their best shot, and I don’t think you really get it until you go through it. 
“We have really little room for error. We don’t have a Brionna Jones or Shatori Walker-Kimbrough to just take over the game because they can. I’m thinking that we’ve learned from that already, but obviously Monday will be a big test.” 
Close video player
Now Playing
