The Morning Ledger: U.S. Tax Plan Draws Ire From Other Nations
By 
 Dec 12, 2017 7:10 am ET 
 
Sign up for the Morning Ledger, emailed to you each weekday morning. Follow us on Twitter: @CFOJournal. All CFO Journal-produced content can be accessed without a subscription.

U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin speaks at the Wall Street Journal CEO Council on Monday November 13th, 2017.
Ralph Alswang for The Wall Street Journal
Good morning. The Trump administration’s planned overhaul of U.S. corporate tax law came under attack from finance ministers of Europe’s five largest economies on Monday, report WSJ’s Andrea Thomas and Todd Buell.
In a letter sent to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, the finance ministers said the U.S. overhaul contains protectionist measures that could violate double-taxation treaties and breach world trade rules. The criticism reflected growing anxiety among foreign executives and officials that the proposals would give American firms unfair tax advantages.
The letter zeroed in on several technical points that tax experts say could have greater impact internationally than the proposed headline corporate tax cut—from 35% currently to 20%—that has become the centerpiece of the initiative.
That sharp proposed cut has separately prompted business and political leaders in many countries to assess their own prospects for headline tax reductions to keep them competitive with the lower American rates. The five ministers—from France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the U.K.—made no reference to the headline tax rate, however, presenting their case as an issue of multilateral standards.
THE DAY AHEAD
The Federal Reserve’s two-day policy meeting begins today, with officials expected to raise the short-term interest rate by a quarter percentage point on Wednesday.
As the Fed deliberates, Amazon.com Inc. is making its job more difficult. Web-driven comparison shoppers are keeping a lid on inflation and weakening retailers’ pricing power, complicating the central bank’s decisions on how much and how fast to raise interest rates.
CORPORATE NEWS

3M said it expects to realize a gain of 40 cents a share from the divestiture.
Bloomberg News
3M sells optical fiber business to Corning. Corning Inc. said it agreed to buy all of 3M Co.’s optical fiber and copper cable business for $900 million in cash.
Mall operator Westfield agrees to $16 billion takeover. Westfield Corp., the Australia-based company that operates U.S. shopping malls including the World Trade Center in New York, said Tuesday it has agreed to a takeover by European property company Unibail-Rodamco SE valuing it at 20.8 billion Australian dollars (US$15.7 billion).
Apple grabs Shazam. Apple Inc. acquired Shazam Entertainment Ltd., giving it ownership of one of the popular song-recognition apps at a time the iPhone maker is looking to boost its music-subscription service.
Apple also asked the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission whether it can block certain shareholder proposals on climate issues and human rights concerns, an effort activists worry could sharply restrict investor rights, reports Reuters.
Atos offers $5 billion for Gemalto. French IT services firm Atos SA made an unsolicited bid to buy smart-card maker Gemalto NV for €4.3 billion ($5.06 billion), part of a broader wave of deals in the payment space as rivals join forces to cut costs.
Amazon opens second cloud-computing center in China. Amazon.com Inc. opened a second cloud-computing data center in China on Tuesday, making it the only country outside the U.S. where its cloud computing unit, Amazon Web Services, operates two separate clusters. AWS is partnering with Ningxia Western Cloud Data Technology Co. Ltd for the new center.
Icahn to launch new board fight with Xerox. Activist investor Carl Icahn seeks a chief executive change in his second offensive against Xerox Corp. The copy-machine maker said Mr. Icahn’s representative resigned from its board, opening the road for a new fight by terminating an existing accord between the company and the activist.
Toshiba, Western Digital resolve dispute over chip unit. Toshiba Corp. and Western Digital Corp. agreed to settle a dispute over Toshiba’s planned sale of its memory-chip unit, people involved the discussions said, clearing a major hurdle to the nearly $18 billion deal.
Mattel flags weak holiday quarter. Mattel Inc. warned of another gloomy holiday season as key brands continue to struggle and toy retailers tighten the amount of inventory they are willing to buy upfront.
GM warns against cutting U.S. electrical vehicle tax-credit. If Congress eliminates an electric vehicle tax credit it “will have an impact” on sales of U.S. electric vehicles such as General Motors Co.’s Bolt, GM Chief Executive Mary Barra said, according to Reuters.
Comcast drops bid for Fox. Comcast Corp. said it is no longer pursuing a deal to acquire several key media and entertainment assets from 21st Century Fox Inc.
Boeing lifts dividend. Boeing Co. said it would raise its quarterly dividend by 20% and replace its existing share buyback program with a new $18 billion authorization, reports Reuters.
REGULATION

Netcracker Technology’s contract was with the Defense Information Systems Agency, which provides telecom infrastructure for the Pentagon.
Saul Loeb / Agence France-Presse /Getty Images
Software firm settles U.S. security probe. Netcracker Technology Corp., a telecom software company, agreed to resolve a criminal investigation of its use of uncleared Russian nationals working in Russia on a U.S. defense project by implementing a security plan that officials hope will serve as a new industry model.
SEC chairman warns investors against bitcoin. Wall Street’s top regulator on Monday raised alarms about the money flooding into bitcoin trading and other cryptocurrency markets, warning the red-hot corner of less-regulated finance is burning with risk for retail investors.
Monsanto offers cash to U.S. farmers who use controversial chemical. Monsanto Co. will give cash back to U.S. farmers who buy a weed killer that has been linked to widespread crop damage, offering an incentive to apply its product even as regulators in several U.S. states weigh restrictions on its use.
ECONOMY

The Forties Pipeline System complex in Grangemouth, Scotland.
Danny Lawson / Zuma Press
Oil prices at 30-month high. The global oil price benchmark its highest level since 2015 Monday after the owner of a major European pipeline said it is shutting the system down for a period of weeks.
Unemployment back to precrisis level in rich countries. The rate of unemployment across the world’s developed economies finally returned to its precrisis level in October, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Treasury says GOP economic agenda would pay for tax cuts. The U.S. Treasury Department said the Republican economic agenda would generate enough growth to pay for the tax cuts being considered by congress, according to a one-page memo using growth assumptions exceeding the official congressional estimates.
 Send tips, suggestions and complaints to the editor: kimberly.johnson@wsj.com.
 Share this:
