Flurry of CFO Moves in July Points to Added Scrutiny For No. 2 Role
By 
 Aug 3, 2017 3:15 pm ET 
 
Several well-known companies shook up the finance chief role in the month of July, a sign that the No. 2 spot isn’t free from intense scrutiny.
Twitter Inc. plucked Ned Segal from Intuit Inc. for the top finance job, relieving Chief Operating Officer and former CFO Anthony Noto from some duties. Kevin Farr is ending a 17-year run at Mattel Inc., a few months after the arrival of a new chief executive. J.C. Penney found a CFO with experience from Darden Restaurants and Wal-Mart Stores Inc., following the retirement announcement of Edward Record.

 An undated handout photo shows Ned Segal, formerly of Goldman Sachs and Intuit, and the new Twitter CFO. Published Credit: Twitter Photo: Twitter 
Some of the changes are likely driven by companies’ desire for better returns in an ever-changing business environment. Volatility stemming from the financial crisis and years of sluggish consumer spending has tapered off, only to be replaced with new challenges. Traditional retailers — and those that supply them — are under intense pressure from Amazon.com Inc. and other online outlets. Technology companies are increasingly embracing cloud-based services, as the semiconductor sector adjusts to a mobile-first — or mobile-only world.
New CEOs continue to make their mark on the No. 2 spot. In addition to Mattel, United States Steel Corp. named a new CFO — Kevin Bradley — a part of its leadership team overhaul following the appointment of a new chief executive in May. Mr. Bradley was previously CFO of crane operator Terex Corp.
However, the turnover rate for finance chiefs during July was 10%, slightly higher than the historical average of 8%, according to executive recruitment firm Korn/Ferry International. The rate through the end of the second quarter was 9%. Korn/Ferry’s tracks CFO information from the 1,000 largest companies in the U.S. and defines turnover as the combination of a departure and a newly-appointed CFO starting in the role.
Some of last month’s announcements will fully turn over later this year. Ron Jadin, CFO for W.W. Grainger Inc. will retire at the end of the year after spending nine years in the role. The company has launched a search for his replacement.

 Bob Halliday, Chief Financial Officer at Applied Materials Inc., stands next to Dan Durn, announced as the company's next finance chief, and Gary Dickerson, president and CEO. Photo: Applied Materials Inc. 
Applied Materials said its current CFO Robert Halliday will remain with the company in a business-development role until the end of 2018, when he plans to retire. He will be replaced by Daniel Durn, who is leaving the CFO role at NXP Semiconductors NV Aug. 6. NXP is in the process of being acquired by Qualcomm Inc. The deal is awaiting approval from the European Commission.
There were at least two CFO to CEO transitions last month. Citrix Systems Inc. promoted CFO David Henshall, to the top role following the departure of CEO Kirill Tatarinov. Matthieu Bucaille, who has served as finance chief for Lazard Ltd. and Lazard Group since 2011, will become CEO of Lazard International and of units in Paris.
There were other moves. Rackspace Inc. plucked its new CFO Louis Alterman from Earthlink (yes, Earthlink, the “internet pioneer that successfully transitioned into cloud networking,” according to the press release.)
Investment research firm Morningstar Inc. named Jason Dubinsky finance chief. Mr. Dubinsky was most recently CFO of planning and central operations for Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc.
Frode Foss, CFO of Norwegian Air Shuttle ASA, a Norwegian low-budget airline, left the company. Mr. Foss had been Norwegian Air’s CFO since the company was established in 2002.
KKR & Co. LP, a New York private equity firm, appointed new chief financial officers in Europe and Asia, Private Equity News reports. Paul Horwood, a director and member of the finance team at the firm, will replace outgoing European CFO Peter Liu. Mr. Liu will move to Hong Kong where he will take up a new role as the CFO for KKR Asia.
 Share this:
