XPO Considering Sale of Con-way Truckload Unit
XPO Logistics has received offers for Con-way’s truckload business, but hasn’t decided whether to sell.
 Oct. 7, 2015 12:22 p.m. ET 
 
 XPO Logistics Inc.  XPO 0.22%  has received offers for the truckload division of Con-way Inc., the trucking operator it is acquiring in a $3 billion deal, but the company hasn’t decided whether to sell, Chief Executive Bradley Jacobs said Wednesday. 
A sale would carve out an operation with $632 million in annual revenue, about 11% of Con-way’s overall revenue, but that has seen slimmer profits this year. A truckload carrier will handle a load from a single retailer or manufacturer. That’s a relatively small portion of Con-way’s business, which is centered around handling loads for multiple customers on its trucks. 
“We have made no decision yet on whether or not to keep Con-way Truckload. It’s true we have received several unsolicited inbound calls from interested buyers but we haven’t decided,” Mr. Jacobs said in an e-mail. 
Mr. Jacobs said in an interview he has been approached by three interested buyers for Con-way’s truckload unit, and that he would consider selling it for a high price that would offset some of the debt XPO is taking on for the acquisition. Still, he said, there are a lot of synergies if XPO keeps the unit. “We’re keeping an open mind,” Mr. Jacobs said. 
XPO shares, which reached a 2015 low of $21.62 on Sept. 28, were up more than 3% Wednesday to $29.14. 
top logistics news
Get the latest logistics and supply chain news and analysis via an email newsletter. Sign up here.
XPO announced the purchase of Con-way in September, the latest in a series of big acquisitions that includes the purchase earlier this year of French trucker Norbert Dentressangle SA for $3.5 billion. The deals push XPO beyond its roots as an “asset-light” freight broker, where the company arranges freight transport for industrial shippers on other companies’ trucks, and into the business of operating its own trucks. Selling off Con-way Truckload would focus XPO more directly on the less-than-truckload arena, where trucks operate on shorter hauls, often in scheduled operations from distribution centers to stores. 
Con-way Truckload ranks as the 20th-largest truckload carrier in the U.S., according to SJ Consulting Group, but has seen its share of the market shrink in the last two years. The unit’s revenue fell 11% in the first six months of this year and its operating earnings declined 23% to $23.6 million. 
Mr. Jacobs said XPO already is looking at changes in Con-way Freight’s LTL service as the company prepares to close on the deal this quarter. He said the company is considering adding a cheaper economy service to Con-way’s premium-priced distribution service. 
The premium service makes up only about a third of the total LTL market and XPO wants to introduce technology that will allow Con-way to tap the larger economy portion of the market. 
Con-way recently announced a 4.9% general rate increase for its non-contract LTL service, effective Oct. 19. 
 —Laura Stevens contributed to this article.  
 Write to Paul Page at paul.page@wsj.com
