Today’s Top Supply Chain and Logistics News From WSJ
American importers and exporters aren’t sitting back satisfied with a five-year labor deal at West Coast ports. In a letter signed by some 100 business groups, companies that rely on global trade are asking the International Longshore and Warehouse Union and the Pacific Maritime Association to extend the five-year pact they signed last year after a deeply contentious negotiation. Labor and management chiefs already told an industry meeting they’d like to see a longer deal, WSJ Logistics Report’s Erica E. Phillips writes, but there are no hints of a follow-up meeting and shippers remain skeptical. The pain from the slowdown at ports from California to Seattle remains fresh to many companies, however, and groups including the National Retail Federation are looking for action on several fronts—whether it is new labor law or a longer contract—to bring the “stability and predictability” to port operations.
  Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. is putting more money behind its effort to rid its shopping platform of counterfeit goods. Alibaba co-founder Jack Ma disclosed the new effort in a speech to employees, the WSJ’s Kathy Chu reports, and says it includes plans to hire 300 people devoted solely to fighting fake goods. “We’ll add more if it’s not enough,” Mr. Ma said in the prepared remarks. Alibaba’s urgency comes as Western companies are stepping up pressure on the Chinese e-commerce giant, and it shows the problems the persistent counterfeit issue creates for the company. Several luxury brands have sued, but the deeper concern is Alibaba’s reputation and its ability to maintain relationships with big sellers as it tries to expand around the world. It’s also become a competitive issue: rival JD.com touts its merchandise reliability and scoffs at Alibaba’s claim that counterfeiting is an industry-wide problem. 
 The American consumer isn’t helping the shipping economy much. U.S. retail sales fell in February and figures for January were revised down sharply amid a drop in spending on gasoline and autos, the WSJ’s Jeffrey Sparshott reports. The report is a setback for shipping and logistics companies that have been looking for sales to help clear out retailer inventories and get more goods moving to stores. A separate report from the U.S. Commerce Department showed the ratio of business and retail inventories to sales both ticked up to post-recession highs in January. The bright spot in the sales report was that sales excluding automobiles and gasoline grew 0.3%. Inventories are growing faster, however, and businesses are likely to slow down their supply chains if consumers don’t open their wallets.
TRANSPORTATION

 The Port of Oakland. Photo: Bloomberg News 
 The tanker business has been one of the few bright spots for the maritime industry, but analysts are forecasting choppier waters ahead. New tanker construction and the prospect of tighter oil supplies are pressuring the booming business of shipping oil, the WSJ’s Dan Strumpf reports. The business has benefited from the surging production and low oil prices that have left energy companies in tatters. That’s because storage space is so tight that tankers are in heavy demand and they’re crowding ports with “floating storage.” But Asia’s shipyards will add more than 200 tankers to fleets through 2017, says Drewry Maritime Research, the fastest shipbuilding pace in four years. Many will be the largest class of tankers, capable of holding more than 2 million barrels of oil. That will push ship leasing rates lower just as oil prices are likely to rise, sending profitability below the water line.
 A multinational investor agreement to buy Australian rail and port operator Asciano Ltd. shows the country’s infrastructure remains highly prized even amid a commodities slump. Canada’s Brookfield Infrastructure Partners LP is teaming with Australia’s Qube Holdings Ltd. and several global funds to acquire Asciano for US$6.7 billion, ending a bidding war for the business, the WSJ’s Rhiannon Hoyle reports. Australian infrastructure has been coveted in global circles, and investors are particularly interested in the ports to exploit the world’s sharpening focus on transport networks to facilitate trade. Under the new deal, Asciano’s main business units will be broken up, with one group taking the Pacific National freight rail business. Qube, Brookfield and others will buy Asciano’s port container business, which includes terminals in Sydney and Melbourne.
QUOTABLE
 ‘Every brand and counterfeiter knows which Chinese platform welcomes fakes, and it ain’t JD.com.’ 
 Boeing Co. is consolidating portions of its commercial jet unit in a bid to reduce its overhead costs. (WSJ) 
U.S. producer prices fell 0.2% in February from the month before. (WSJ) 
New car sales in Europe rose 14% in February. (WSJ) 
Aluminum giant Alcoa Inc. said its new spinoff business focused on aerospace and automotive work would be called Arconic. (WSJ) 
Global shipping and airline companies, port operators and transport groups are committing to trying to shut down international wildlife trafficking routes. (The Guardian) 
Maersk Line will raise Asia-to-Europe shipping rates by $400 per container to address a severe decline in prices on major trade lanes. (Reuters) 
Workers at Scotland’s Grangemouth container port began a two-week strike over changes to working conditions. (The Scotsman) 
Apparel retailer H&M says it will increase its sourcing from Bangladesh. (Sourcing Journal) 
Groups representing U.S. export industries say they support a Coast Guard proposal to comply with international container-weight rules. (DC Velocity)
India’s exports fell 5.7% in February and imports declined 5%. (Economic Times) 
Chinese air express airline SF Express is considering an initial public offering. (Hong Kong Economic Journal) 
U.S. Postal Service contract carrier Matheson Postal Services is adding 37 compressed natural gas and liquefied natural gas tractors. (Heavy Duty Trucking) 
 Deutsche Post DHL chief Frank Appel says concerns over privacy will limit the use of delivery drones. (The Australian) 
More U.S. states are looking at vehicle miles taxes as a way to get money for highway maintenance. (King 5 Seattle) 
 U.S. Auto Parts Network Inc. online sales declined 4% in the fourth quarter of 2015. (Internet Retailer) 
Taiwanese businessman Nobu Su is suing mining giant BHP Billiton , claiming manipulation of iron ore prices for capesize freight vessels. (Splash 24/7) 
ABOUT US
Paul Page is deputy editor of WSJ Logistics Report. Follow him at @PaulPage, and follow the entire WSJ Logistics Report team: @brianjbaskin, @lorettachao, @RWhelanWSJ and @EEPhillips_WSJ, and follow the WSJ Logistics Report on Twitter at @WSJLogistics.
 Write to Paul Page at paul.page@wsj.com
