The Morning Ledger: CEOs Focus on Varying Details of Tax Plan
By 
 Nov 14, 2017 6:33 pm ET 
 
Sign up for the Morning Ledger, emailed to you each weekday morning. Follow us on Twitter: @CFOJournal. All CFO Journal-produced content can be accessed without a subscription.

U.S. Vice President Mike Pence, right, speaks with WSJ Executive Washington Editor and Chief Commentator GErald F. Seib at the Wall Street Journal CEO Council on Tuesday Nov. 14th, 2017.
Paul Morse for The Wall Street Journal
Good morning. While lawmakers in Washington grapple over varying tax overhauls, chief executives are sweating the details in the proposals, write the WSJ’s Theo Francis and Vanessa Fuhrmans. 
Most executives lauded the outlines of the tax bills taking shape on Capitol Hill. But in interviews with corporate chiefs attending the annual Wall Street Journal CEO Council in Washington, many said they are focused on narrower provisions.
Utilities focused on maintaining deductions for interest payments on their heavy borrowing. Multinationals worried a potential excise tax on transactions from U.S. units to foreign affiliates could disrupt global supply chains or crimp investment in operations that employ thousands of U.S. workers. And concern lingered among CEOs of all stripes about whether lawmakers can pass a tax bill at all by year’s end.
Executives said they were unsure the tax overhaul would happen before the end of the year, as the White House and Republican congressional leaders have pledged. A majority attending an onstage interview with Gary Cohn, the president’s top economic adviser, said they didn’t expect lawmakers to meet the self-imposed deadline.
Polls taken during the CEO Council also showed that a vast majority of respondents, some 97%, were joined in the belief that globalization has been a boon for business, while 69% feared President Donald Trump doesn’t agree.
And while congressional Republicans have said that the tax plans would stir spending on plants, machinery and other equipment in the U.S., only a few executives seemed to share the view. Asked whether the tax bill would prompt them raise U.S. investments, only a smattering of executives at the gathering raised their hands. “Why aren’t the other hands up?” Mr. Cohn asked the audience.
THE DAY AHEAD
The U.S. Labor Department releases the consumer-price index for October, with economists predicting a 0.1% uptick from the prior month.
Meanwhile, the New York Fed will release its Empire State manufacturing survey, expected to show factory activity slipped to 25.1 in November from 30.2 the prior month.
Target Corp. and Cisco Systems report quarterly results today.
CFO JOURNAL EXCLUSIVE
SEC to give companies time to adjust to new rev rec rules. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission officials indicated that they will hold off on issuing comment letters scrutinizing company compliance with the new revenue accounting standard in the early stages of implementation, writes CFO Journal’s Tatyana Shumsky.
“This is a very big change, it’s very complicated and companies have put a lot of time and effort into this,” said Mark Kronforst, chief accountant in the SEC’s division of corporation finance, speaking Tuesday at the Financial Executives International Current Financial Reporting Issues conference in New York.
“What I hope is that we’re not going to try to regulate this one company at a time,” Mr. Kronforst said, echoing earlier remarks by SEC Deputy Chief Accountant Sagar Teotia.
Still, CFOs shouldn’t assume that an accommodative stance on revenue recognition means they can slack off on compliance. “If something is clearly wrong, or something is omitted, absolutely a comment will go out,” Mr. Kronforst said.
CORPORATE NEWS

General Electric Chief Executive Officer John Flannery presents the company’s new strategy and financial Targets to investors at a meeting in New York, U.S., Nov. 13, 2017.
Alwyn Scott/Reuters
GE shares have a second bad day. General Electric Co. shares tumbled 5.9% Tuesday, causing the conglomerate to lose its crown as the biggest U.S. industrial company as Wall Street digested a turnaround plan.
Airbus, Boeing seal more than $75 billion in plane orders. Airbus SE and Boeing Co. secured more than $75 billion in single-aisle plane commitments, demonstrating unrelenting appetite for their most popular planes from discount carriers as the airlines lock in deals to support growth for years to come.
Paris scoffs at Airbnb plan to curb illegal rentals. Airbnb Inc.’s decision to enforce a cap of the number days a year that hosts can rent out dwellings in parts of Paris is the first expansion of a measure the firm rolled out last year in London and Amsterdam. However, Paris officials dismissed the move as insufficient.
Google pays to put search engine back on Firefox browser in U.S. Mozilla Corp. rolled out a major update to its Firefox web browser that included Google as its default search engine in the U.S., Canada, Hong Kong and Taiwan.
Fidelity wins whistleblower retaliation case. A jury sided with Fidelity Investments in rejecting a claim the mutual funds company retaliated against a former employee after she complained that it potentially defrauded investors by incorrectly calculating expenses, Reuters reported.
America’s fund companies argue proposed tax change will cost investors. Some of the largest fund companies are opposing a provision in the Senate tax bill that would prevent investors from minimizing taxes by choosing the specific shares that are being sold when they sell part of a position. Instead, investors would have to sell their oldest shares first.
Volkswagen says offices of CFO, HR chief, chairman raided by authorities. Volkswagen AG’s said prosecutors and tax authorities raided the offices of several senior officials of the company, Reuters reported.
HSBC to pay $352 million to resolve French probe. HSBC Holdings PLC said that its Swiss private-banking unit will pay €300 million ($352 million) to resolve charges that it helped clients evade taxes in France.
REGULATION

Mohamed El-Erian, former chief executive of Pacific Investment Management Co., is under consideration for the Federal Reserve vice chairman’s post.
Bloomberg
White House considers former Pimco CEO for Fed post. The White House is considering economist Mohamed El-Erian as one of several candidates to potentially serve as the Federal Reserve’s vice chairman, a person familiar with the matter told the Wall Street Journal. Mr. El-Erian is the former chief executive of Pacific Investment Management Co. and a former deputy director of the International Monetary Fund.
Senate GOP tax plan to include repeal of health law individual mandate. Senate Republicans appeared poised to inject health-care politics into the debate over taxes. Lawmakers signaled they would seek to repeal the Affordable Care Act requirement that most Americans must have insurance coverage as part of their tax-overhaul.
Russian cybersecurity software found on U.S. government computers. Roughly one-sixth of American agencies found a Russian cybersecurity firm’s software on their computers after the U.S. government ordered them to look for the company’s products and remove them.
U.S. exchanges cite security risks in asking for database delay. U.S. exchanges are calling for a last-minute delay to a vast database of trading information that regulators have touted as a defense against episodes like the May 2010 “Flash Crash.”
Venezuelan bonds at standstill following default determination. Venezuelan bonds, already trading at distressed levels, were at a near standstill a day after a credit-rating firm declared the nation in default on missed interest payments.
CFTC fines Statoil, citing market manipulation. The U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission said Tuesday that it fined Norway’s Statoil ASA $4 million for attempting to manipulate energy markets in 2011.
ECONOMY

A Wahl Clipper assembler working at the company’s plant in Sterling, Ill., on Oct. 30, 2017.
Associated Press
U.S. manufacturing rides rising tide. American manufacturing has picked up pace over the last 12 months thanks to steady global economic growth, a rise in energy and other commodity prices, and increased business confidence.
Household debt reaches new record. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York said household debt totaled $12.955 trillion last quarter, up 0.9% from the spring for a 13th straight quarterly increase. That was the most on record, though the figure wasn’t adjusted for inflation or population growth. As a share of U.S. economic output, household debt was about 66% last quarter versus a high of around 87% in early 2009.
 Send tips, suggestions and complaints to the editor: kimberly.johnson@wsj.com.
 Share this:
