Today’s Top Supply Chain and Logistics News From WSJ
While the White House pushes American companies to restore manufacturing in the U.S., the country’s factory sector is getting a boost from a seemingly unlikely source: China. Investments by Chinese companies in the U.S. have grown over the past decade, the WSJ’s Nina Trentmann reports, as rising labor costs at home, saturated local markets and prospects for new trade barriers push China’s manufacturers to consider extending their supply chains to North America. A research group says Chinese firms plowed $8.6 billion into the U.S. from 2000 to 2016, with companies offsetting higher labor costs with more automation and lower electricity and transportation expenses. They also can get around some trade barriers and more easily reach U.S. consumers. A maker of kitchen cabinets that has started assembly in the U.S. says the workers “are not cheap,” for instance, but the company saves on logistics spending—an economic calculation that may change still more if the U.S. imposes new import taxes. 
 Toy-makers may talk about how entrenched their supply chains are, but one business may be stretching its manufacturing capabilities in a surprising way. Hasbro Inc. is working with a partner to begin making Play-Doh in Massachusetts starting next year, the WSJ’s Paul Ziobro reports, a change that would bring production of the moldable clay to the U.S. for the first time since 2004. It’s a rare move in an industry that depends heavily on overseas factories and comes as toy companies reassess their manufacturing footprint, given President Donald Trump’s push toward trade policies that favor domestic production. Hasbro, which uses factories in China and Turkey to make Play-Doh, says the move to a new U.S. line is basic economics: Play-Doh sales have grown enough that the market is big enough to justify manufacturing in the U.S., with lower shipping costs offsetting the higher production spending.
 Afghanistan authorities and raw-materials exporters had high expectations for a new “Silk Road” railway link between the country and China, but it hasn’t worked out as they’d hoped. Instead, the WSJ’s Jessica Donati and Ehsanullah Amiri report the rail line meant to promote regional trade has run into roadblocks, highlighting the difficulty Beijing faces in extending its ambitious infrastructure plan into a volatile and politically fractious part of the world. The freight train on the Sino-Afghan Special Transportation Railway has been operating from the Yangtze River port of Nantong, carrying electrical supplies, clothing and other goods to the Afghan river port of Hairatan. But the trains return empty since Uzbekistan refuses to allow Afghan goods to transit its territory. They reportedly fear the trade could create a pipeline for drugs and revenues that benefit terrorists. The countries are trying to work out an agreement. But for now, the operation shows that tracks alone won’t build a stronger trading economy.
SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGIES

 The Port of Hairatan, Afghanistan. Photo: Jessica Donati/The Wall Street Journal 
  J.C. Penney Co. is joining the growing list of American retailers trying to survive by getting smaller. The century-old store will shut up to 140 stores and two distribution centers, the WSJ’s Anne Steele reports, extending the e-commerce-driven upheaval that is changing the landscape of U.S. retailing. J.C. Penney Chief Executive Marvin Ellison says the closings are aimed at adjusting Penney’s supply chain strategy to compete against “the growing threat of online retailers.” The remaining stores will be used to ship or pick up online orders, minimizing delivery costs. About three-quarter of Penney deliveries touch physical stores, and closing the distribution centers in Lakeland, Fla., and Buena Park, Calif., suggests the company will handle more customer deliveries straight from stores. That’s a more complicated and potentially costly strategy that likely means adding inventory to the remaining storefronts.
 What happens when a robot truck gets caught between two self-driving cars? Autonomous-tech truck maker Otto is at the center of a legal dispute between the company’s parent Uber Technology Inc. and Google parent Alphabet Inc., the WSJ’s Tim Higgins and Jack Nicas report, in a case that highlights the high stakes in the autonomous-vehicle technology race. Alphabet’s self-driving car Waymo LLC unit is suing Uber, claiming former key employee Anthony Levandowski took critical technology from the business. Mr. Levandowski left Waymo to start Otto, which has moved rapidly to get attention for its self-driving rigs. He started Otto last year and sold it in a matter of months for $680 million to Uber, where the suit says Mr. Levandowski took Waymo’s trade secrets. The dispute is unlikely to slow down advancement of autonomous trucks, but it suggests the urgency that development of the technology carries in Silicon Valley.
QUOTABLE
 ‘We’re not replacing volume, we’re adding volume.’ 
Number of the Day
77%
Approximate share of J.C. Penney customer deliveries that touch physical stores.
IN OTHER NEWS
International trade flows grew 1.2% last year, the slowest pace since volumes crashed in 2009 in the wake of the financial crisis. (WSJ)
 Global Logistic Properties Ltd. , a backbone of the logistics industry in the U.S. and China, has narrowed its list of bidders for a potential buyout. (WSJ) 
President Donald Trump plans to sign executive orders calling for the repeal of a major Obama-era water regulation and carbon emissions policies. (WSJ)
A gauge of consumer sentiment fell slightly in February but remained near a 10-year high. (WSJ) 
U.S. new home sales expanded 3.7% in January after a steep decline in December. (WSJ) 
The World Trade Organization ruled a Russian import ban on European Union pigs and pork products breaches international trade rules. (WSJ) 
Brazilian mining company Vale SA says iron ore prices could average above $80 this year after falling below $40 in 2016. (WSJ) 
 Gap Inc.’s sales rose during the holiday period and the apparel chain says they may increase this year, bucking a slump at mall-based retailers. (WSJ) 
 United Parcel Service Inc. will spend $275 million to build a regional package hub in Salt Lake City. (Atlanta Business Chronicle) 
 Expeditors International of Washington Inc. reported a 3% decline in fourth-quarter net profit with margins weakening despite double-digit growth in shipping volume. (American Shipper) 
 British Airways parent IAG says cargo revenue declined 6.6% in 2016 as a 9% drop in average freight rates offset improving traffic. (Lloyd’s Loading List) 
 Atlas Air Worldwide Holdings Inc. will shutter its Florida West unit after failing to sell the regional freighter business. (The Loadstar)
U.S. rail regulators say employment at Class 1 freight railroads fell 5.2% year-over-year in January. (Progressive Railroading)
A survey shows supply chain inefficiencies create big gaps in health care at hospitals. (Supply Chain Quarterly) 
A Hanoi court sentenced two former executives at Vietnamese shipbuilder Vinashinlines to death for embezzlement. (Channel News Asia) 
ABOUT US
Paul Page is deputy editor of WSJ Logistics Report. Follow him at @PaulPage, and follow the entire WSJ Logistics Report team: @brianjbaskin, @jensmithWSJ and @EEPhillips_WSJ and follow the WSJ Logistics Report on Twitter at @WSJLogistics.
Subscribe to this email newsletter by clicking here:  http://on.wsj.com/Logisticsnewsletter .  
 Write to Paul Page at paul.page@wsj.com
