Reinsurers Will Largely Be Writing the Checks to Pay for Irma Damage
Reinsurers play an especially large role in Florida because smaller insurance carriers are required to buy ample reinsurance 
 By 
 Sept. 10, 2017 3:42 p.m. ET 
 
A global array of reinsurance companies will bear the financial brunt of Hurricane Irma’s damage to potentially millions of homes across Florida.
Irma’s winds are expected to leave tens of billions of dollars in insured damage. And when the insurance money arrives for many homeowners, much of it will be via reinsurance companies—not the carrier on their contract.
Reinsurers play an especially large role in Florida’s home-insurance market.
Andrew, Katrina and other severe hurricanes from 1992 through 2005 devastated the state’s insurance marketplace. Most brand-name national home insurers sharply reduced their presence. Picking up the slack today is a state-run “insurer of last resort,” Citizens Property Insurance Corp., and some 50 small to midsize home insurers.
Those carriers all are required to buy ample amounts of reinsurance to help ensure they have money for their policyholders, because they don’t have the fat capital cushions of the national carriers. These reinsurance firms are specialty insurers that take on the risk of some of the policies sold by primary insurers. They send insurers money to help pay claims once claims reach contractual, designated levels.
As a result, the reinsurers “might end up holding the bag” for much of Irma’s damage to residential properties, said Taoufik Gharib, a senior director at Standard & Poor’s Global Ratings.
In addition to reinsurance, the U.S. government’s National Flood Insurance Program will face payouts to those homeowners who hold its policies. Under standard homeowners contracts, insurers cover wind damage but exclude flooding. Much of Irma’s damage is expected to come from storm surge.
The use of so much reinsurance introduces a few worries into the marketplace. The home insurers are exposed to potential disputes with their reinsurers over claims payments, industry analysts note. It also ties the home insurers’ fates to the financial health of their reinsurers.

 Bulking Up / Global reinsurer capital Source: Aon Benfield Analytics 
Irma’s arrival is well-timed from one perspective: The global reinsurance industry is awash in capital. As of March, it had a record $605 billion capital cushion, which was built up thanks in large part to relatively few major natural disasters in the U.S. since 2005.
 Related Video 
 After ​making landfall in the Florida Keys Sunday morning, Hurricane Irma​ brought fierce winds and storm surges to southern Florida, before moving westward to the Gulf Coast. Here's what you need to know. Photo: AP 
 August and September mark peak hurricane season in the Atlantic basin. Here's why the conditions in these months make them more likely to form there. Photos: NASA/NOAA 
“Every company in Florida has reinsurance,” said Joseph Petrelli, president of Demotech Inc., an insurance ratings firm with a specialty in Florida’s homeowners market. “They buy reinsurance for multiple storms, and it is across the entire season.”
The national carriers now account for only about one-fifth of Florida’s market, far less than the more than half they commanded in 1992, according to S&P. The replacements include such companies as Universal Insurance Holdings Inc., Heritage Insurance Holdings Inc. and HCI Group Inc. 
The state runs a reinsurance company itself, the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund, that provides much of the reinsurance. The next biggest providers to insurers in the state are Lloyd’s of London, Bermuda-based Everest Re Group Ltd. , Germany-based Allianz SE and Tokio Marine Holdings Inc. in Japan, according to Fitch Ratings.
Many reinsurers that sell to Florida’s home insurers are in Bermuda, which has grown into a global reinsurance capital in part by specializing in the state’s hurricane risk.
In at least one instance, the reinsurance comes from Omaha, Neb. HCI Group Chief Executive Paresh Patel says a unit of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. is one of its several reinsurers.
The heavy reliance on this behind-the-scenes backstop community sent reinsurance stocks tumbling over the past week as Irma’s power grew, while well-known national homeowners insurers like Allstate Corp. were down more modestly.
Many reinsurers fell sharply last week, when fear about Irma’s danger to Florida began growing. Among the big decliners: Axis Capital Holdings Ltd. , Aspen Insurance Holdings Ltd. , and Validus Holdings Ltd. 
Aside from reinsurance, some insurance firms use “catastrophe bonds” to help offset their risk from a natural disaster. Because interest rates have been low since the global financial crisis of 2008, many yield-hungry pension plans, endowments and other big investors have pumped money into these securities.
The popularity of “cat bonds” has fueled competition with traditional reinsurance companies. Premium rates for catastrophe reinsurance for property have fallen about half since 2011, according to reinsurance brokers.
The “massive amount of new capital” flowing into cat bonds and the other reinsurance investments was a pivotal factor in allowing the smaller insurers to take on responsibility that the national carriers shed, said Kevin McCarty, a founder of Celtic Global Consulting LLC and former Florida insurance commissioner. As prices were driven down, these smaller firms could buy more reinsurance.
Many analysts say Harvey and Irma and other disasters this year would need to top $100 billion in insured damage before prices would harden, given how much capital there is. Risk-modeling firms estimate that insured damage from Harvey will be between $25 billion and $35 billion, while some early estimates put Irma’s in the tens of billions of dollars also.
To help insure that reinsurance arrangements are adequate, Florida insurance regulators annually run a “catastrophe stress test” that simulates the impact of major hurricanes and the insurers’ ability to pay claim, a spokeswoman for Florida’s Office of Insurance Regulation said.
—Nicole Friedman contributed to this article.
 Write to Leslie Scism at leslie.scism@wsj.com
 Appeared in the September 11, 2017, print edition as 'Reinsurers on Hook for Damages.'
