German Glassmaker Schott Scouts U.S. for Acquisitions After Tax Overhaul
President Donald Trump signs the tax overhaul plan in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, D.C., U.S., Dec. 22, 2017. Photo: Reuters 
Schott AG, the German glass and glass-ceramics maker, is on the hunt for U.S. takeover targets, following the enactment of President Donald Trump’s new tax law.
The lower corporate tax rate, which fell to 21% from 35%, is “sending a positive signal” to companies, said Chief Financial Officer Jens Schulte.
Mainz-based Schott is looking to spend €50 million to €150 million ($61.4 million to $184.1 million) per deal and could pursue several acquisitions, Mr. Schulte said. The company, which makes glass for everything from home ovens to solar power panels to medical devices, is prepared to spend several hundred million euro on these acquisitions, he added.
Schott on Friday reported profit of €197 million on revenue of €2.05 billion for the financial year ended Sept. 30, 2017.
The company operates six manufacturing facilities in the U.S., as well as a corporate center in Elmsford, New York. The U.S. operations will benefit from the lower tax rate, Mr. Schulte said.
Other provisions of the new law, including changes in interest deductibility and a new charge for deductible payments to foreign affiliates — dubbed BEAT — won’t have a significant impact on Schott, the CFO added.
“The U.S. is a strong market for optical industries,” Mr. Schulte said. Expanding in the U.S. would enable Schott to extend its portfolio and add new product lines, he said.
Schott’s last U.S. acquisition took place in 2009, when the company bought Elecpac, a division of Wilbrecht Electronics Inc., an electronic packaging company.
Schott’s free cash flow totaled €153 million for the year ended September and the company also has a €200 million undrawn syndicated loan facility, the finance chief said. Should Schott require more capital for its overseas acquisitions, it could issue a German Schuldschein, a particular form of debt instrument that is marketed predominantly to private investors, Mr. Schulte said.
German companies issued 150 of these bonds in 2017, up from 115 in 2016, according to Scope Ratings AG, a ratings agency. “For private companies like Schott, it makes sense to raise capital in this market,” said Sebastian Zank, a director at Scope. “Investor demand has grown substantially,” Mr. Zank said.
 Share this:
