Tax Overhaul Would End Company Breaks for Executive Pay
The new rule would apply to taxable years beginning in 2018. Government officials estimate the proposal would generate about $9.3 billion in additional tax revenue over 10 years.
Critics of the proposed move say the added taxes would raise the cost of attracting and retaining company leaders. Opponents also say the measure could ultimately make executives less accountable to investors by undermining the trend toward the linking of pay to performance.
“I think the new rule will be extremely costly for companies,” said Mr. Murphy. “Any attempt to regulate executive pay through the tax system has caused negative consequences that far outweigh any benefits.”
The 1993 provision intended to incentivize companies to keep base salaries and bonuses under $1 million and push for better governance with the tax break for performance-based pay. The rule applies to the compensation of the chief executive and the next three highest-paid executives.
Principal financial officers, typically finance chiefs, were excluded in a bureaucratic quirk. The Internal Revenue Service decided they were not covered by the restriction after reconciling the tax code to disclosure regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
In addition to eliminating the exemption for performance-based pay, the new measure also seeks to capture more tax revenue from golden parachutes and similar compensation packages awarded after a merger or acquisition. The proposal mandates that once a corporate officer triggers the deduction limit, the restriction remains in place for all compensation earned during his or her time at the company even if the person is no longer listed in the company’s proxy.
Other forms of compensation that would now be taxed include commission-based pay and retirement income from qualified plans or annuities.
A combination of tax deductibility and shareholder feedback have led compensation to lean more heavily on performance-contingent equity through the years, said Matthew Goforth, senior governance adviser of compensation-research firm Equilar Inc. Median stock-based compensation for large-cap company chief executives jumped 44% over the last five years, while salaries increased about 10%, according to Equilar.
Lawmakers argue that current norms “have resulted in a shift away from cash compensation paid to senior executives in favor of stock options and other forms of performance pay,” in a Congressional summary describing the measure. The shift has caused “perverse consequences as some executives focus on—and could, in rare cases, manipulate—quarterly results…rather than on the long-term success of the company,” the document said.
Some analysts say the new changes might yield unintended consequences as compensation packages adapt to the new rules. Businesses could start paying their senior executives higher salaries, since they no longer lose a tax break for cash salaries exceeding $1 million a year.
But independent board directors would likely continue to look for ways to link compensation with performance. Under the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act, investors can express disapproval about high pay packages for top corporate officers through “say-on-pay” votes. Boards fear a “thumbs down” on such referendums—which are nonbinding—because they typically reflect deeper investor discontent.
The loss of the tax break could prompt a few companies to stop using stock options but competitive pressures may play a bigger role, said Steve Seelig, senior regulatory adviser for executive compensation at Willis Towers Watson, a professional services firm. “Peer practices are very, very strong in the world of executive pay,” he said.
In the end, companies would just pay the bigger tax bill, said Michael Melbinger, head of the employee benefits and executive compensation practice at Winston & Strawn LLP in Chicago.
“I think this rule will have almost no effect on the size and composition of pay packages,” he said. “It’s like the luxury tax in baseball. That certainly doesn’t stop the Yankees and Dodgers from getting the players they want.”
 Write to Ezequiel Minaya at ezequiel.minaya@wsj.com
