CFO Moves: Comerica, Superdry, Priceline Group, Clorox
CFOs on the move. Photo: The Wall Street Journal 
Comerica Inc., the Dallas-based bank, named Mauricio Oritz chief accounting officer. He succeeds Muneera S. Carr, who was promoted to the chief financial officer on Jan 23., a move announced in November. Mr. Oritz was most recently assistant controller, a role he’s held since Feb. 2015, and has been at the bank since 2010. Mr. Oritz will be responsible for all aspects of Comerica’s accounting function, including tax, financial and regulatory reporting, accounting policy and accounting operations. 
Superdry PLC, the British apparel retailer, named Ed Barker as CFO and director, on a date to be confirmed during the second quarter of 2018. He succeeds CFO Nick Wharton, who plans to step down retire. Mr. Barker is currently director of group finance and was previously interim CFO at J. Sainsbury PLC. Prior to that he was group financial controller at Burberry PLC.
Priceline Group Inc., a Norwalk, Conn.-based travel website, named David Goulden finance chief, effective March 1. Mr. Goulden succeeds Daniel Finnegan, who announced his retirement last year after 14 years with Priceline. Mr. Goulden will join Priceline from Dell Technologies Inc. where he held the post of president of the infrastructure solutions group. Prior to his time at Dell, Mr. Goulden held numerous posts at EMC Corporation, which was acquired by Dell in 2016.
Mr. Goulden is slated to collect a base salary of $600,000 and a signing bonus of $500,000, according to a regulatory filing. He is also eligible for a target annual bonus of 210% of his base salary and will be awarded a grant of restricted stock unit valued at $6.3 million.
Clorox Co., an Oakland, Calif.-based maker of a range of consumer products, has named Kevin Jacobsen finance chief effective April 1, according to a regulatory filing. He succeeds Stephen Robb, who has been with the company for 29 years. Mr. Robb is slated to retire from the company March 31. Mr. Jacobsen joined the company in 1995 and has held his current post of vice president, financial planning & analysis since 2011.
Mr. Jacobsen is slated to see his base salary rise to $500,000 as part of his appointment. He will also be awarded stock options valued at $200,000 and performance shares also valued at $200,000, among other compensation.
 Share this:
