Banco Popular: Europe's Successful Failure
This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.
coming up on her down the street ... your success with handling a failure ... and a little known regulatory change that could push gas prices up twenty percent say ahead of the headlines ... say on top of the markets ... this is ... her down the street from the Wall Street ... hello and welcome to Heard on the street the podcast we are the Wall Street Journal's home or commentary helpings financial all over the world ... reporting from New York and Erie and got free ... joined by my colleague Alex Frangos in London to Alex ... same area ... in our second segment will talk about why the biggest event to global energy prices may come from shipping fuel ... but first ... we have heard on the streets all babies on the line from London to talk to us about the failure this week of the Spanish think ... Uncle Puplava ... Heights type of things for joining us ... I ... so called Bongo couple are failed this week and was ... taken over by Congress on an air which is another large Spanish Bay ... not long ago I think this would have sent European markets into a tailspin but the news was taken critique calmly so what's going on ... but isn't the most number of things we I mean ... you get the process which was an un tested for excessive ... of African ace has taken control of the Bakken and selling off because they've decided that it's fading ... preceded very quickly very smoothly ... you ... know that we knew that this bank was in trouble the shares of performing incredibly that they ... there was some brews all ... deposits tossed into ... the redoubts frost in the sort of thing ... I aam ... boxy their own on new homes in on Tuesday ... evening activity so that when Herman and the inhabitants of Iran and having been reposting and from what I was going on with it all day ... and as you can it be so still that ... to wake up on Wednesday morning with announcement that ... it was done and dusted some time that bolted ... and spends unit is this the whole thing was completes Amanda Sneider ... the size of a banging risk of Spezza it was safe ... Sundays are in that sense it just the kind of untidy solution ... exactly so there was that was not in the sense that you know there was a was done quickly quietly cleanly ... I aam and I guess people come into confidence enough that you from that in some ways ... there's also the fact that an ear is expected of banks with the kind of ... crisis and ... it's it's it's a it's a sign that ... you know the several years on now from Spain's banking crisis all the other banks ... are pretty healthy and this was the kind of ally right so ... we didn't see your big selloff them in other Spanish banks that if anything seemed to be covered at all the great ... yep city and I think in it ... vacates is hats ... I'm that that it's easy to think that they can act with confidence because ... unit this situation spent Friday on for quite long so the way back in the April but the ... attendance to the for the ... I knew general meeting for the banks have said look ... units with things of deterioration still ... we need to make more Moxie fab to as within and need to raise two now billion ... a year areas of capital ... and that was the if any a year off to they've just done it to announce that in the red after it said ... everybody knew there was something going on here bots ... none of that woes The causing any contagion end of the Spanish bank says because this is a Addicks ... the rules of credit to be healthy now but you know the the the bad things have been ... a good job with the rhythm of the bad assets of and so on ... um you know this does not say much news ... bad loans being forms ... I mean this is yet will see a complete contrast to the tothe where ... you almost every bank has has a large pool of babbles of some condo will still have stuff to do with ... and last year when we've or in the past couple of years we've had ... problems with different banks at different levels ... the whole market has gone up and down together ... in fact was happening in Spain said ... it was a ferry that was an isolated case but also as for that to be small said ... all Masipa sickle it what what ... procedures did banking regulators put in place that sort of allowed this to happen so quickly over the weekend I mean what have they set up in advance that was different from what the deal ... they had in the past that because you care to deal with the situation like that ... I would be all your advice me to get into ... an incredibly long and very boring very timid on that ... I mean to but it's a but it's in the Senate ... unit say we now have this ... I mean it every every ... country a piece of Western country now has ... a kind of a resolution ... to assess that they use which is the ... jist of the way in which cricket discusses the step in and take control of the bank ... when it's in serious trouble and when when something is to become a bow to ... you now hear it since the crisis of our rates ... on ... you the main thing that politicians and activists of in re concerned about is ... is not using taxpayers' money ... and its a aam and Protect tentacles to thrive ... and said it ... is this ... the final full question of how these rules work in Europe ... came fully into false ... Dosti eighteen in January ... um well BdB ... to touch them to show what the ECB was able to make a determination of April the bank was ... like it if I own I was because the has been a significant increase in deposits going out ... in the past few days ... and days and one says Mabe estimation they had a bit to what is the single resolution polls and the Spanish national ... the equipments of apps ... and those guys then ... they just take control of the bank ... they make a determination of how much technically nice be wiped out ... and then they can up north in and see who will buy up for what money ... on us laugh and they want tell that she is the Holy see ... has soared to some investors single euro ... one euro ... what a deal and ... and and aam ... I really you you mention it to wiping up the junior debt that something that's attracting a lot of attention she wrote about this week ... as well which is there were ... certain types of junior debt here at work ... you know that that that that the bank to the issue that was do you know head ... and was meant to be something of a shock absorber and ... what is a beacon to be the kind of thing that could prevent the banks failing by automatically Turkey to equity but in this case ... aam that's not what happened so what what goes through Kinder these these contingent convertible bonds and ... in what they did and didn't do and Banco popular kids' ... show ... to visit the zoo the phones that sits ... he did that come immediately off to equity incentive to take stocks is when when things go ... wrong says ... like any company of eighty if a company goes bust ... use you stopped and pares losses on the people to ... to ... Danish officials say the most risk in terms of support not compensate affected and it got two new phones in Stevens which banks in order to try and show that ... they're on the troll and bolt to match its defenses against ... big losses ... unit they came up with the structure which has bases in Europe that use elsewhere as well when a huge issue these phones fax ... you when you hit a sudden capital ratios which is unit the map actually a compact sized Apache ... this appears to convert immediately ... I'm ... now the thing about this is a mean custody on a doubt that any bones is ever gonna come the books must be ... because ... if the bank stocks to lose money in its capital riches stopped the car in ... the fiscal Andy ... this is nothing rigid be steady and it's got any managerial competence and capacity to do something about it ... it will then do something about it will raise more equity it will sell some good assets or something ... it will repair center and she quickly because ... it is just it's just bad form it's embarrasing it's a terrible things happen ... to get the point where one of two bones components ... if the in the other case the fuel deterioration incredibly rapidly ... because of a very big very sudden loss ... sets of losses ... because of a run on deposits ... Olson other things that this ... then add to the trigger point Overby Massa because if you're going through them ... you're going to them pretty quickly under pretend to them Brady quite soft ... and said ... they weren't begin they when they went to confess in this kind of ... sensible oh we've just gone through the tree gets the ... we've now got some fresh equity ... it's your concern and Japan to be sold or are so awesome and I that's ... because it threatens banks' ... respective costs ... take their boss Berry talks to the ... masses ... ancillary last year is going to protect taxpayers was not ... the type of capital that Banca Popolare that got wiped out ... but just that there was a capital there was enough cushion ... that ... some of their income and say ... you know we're going to ... Rio or buying the bank for euro were also better rates of equity ... recapitalize this panic ... because you were able to wiped out that capital ... we can do that without you know imposing offices on ... depositors' ... senior bondholders or on a tax could bring ... a check the Need today and into the tree ... this stuff did its job now ... I mean to you we all think of the cost of a of the normal time being so that she has some of the recent tentative cents ... Visa Miss Janey of phones in its recently sold bones in in this couple structure from ... from a Spano from Bank of openness patio ... has ... the adjective form of eleven office ends ... now it as you said aesthetics that tells you something ... about how risky they were they were a lot like equity ... and in fact in the end they want on my fifty so people knew what the should of known what risk they were taking on when the puppies up its people to have a fair idea at the icing to perceive it's gamy it doesn't necessarily mean ... that you should expect the bank to fail ... I mean if you really expect Bank fell than you would be putting any money and that that will serve a cure ... him of that ... except you Annual ... you make it that you are taking a very high return ... full something ... um you know there are other elements of the so the types of phones in in knits the back of a couple shots from outside the Bella ... heels of a so so it's a good time so best of times and I'm happy ... um ... we have of that stuff is there to absorb losses when things go wrong ... I must admit this ... we are going to have to take a break coming up ... how changes for the shipping industry could mean a jump in prices at the pump ... for more insights enable the law Street Journal's scale on any device with Amazon Alexa ... Dalbar podcast as well as the latest news and market up to its The Wall Street Journal ... listen and viciously ... stay ahead of that time ... they on top of the markets ... this is ... her down the street ... from the Wall Street ... welcome back to her down the street the podcast I Miriam got fried here with Alex Frangos and our colleague Spencer Jacob joins be in the studio here in New York and Spencer ... I married ... so Spencer your own is teaching me about new concepts in new arcane corner to open up ... this week he wrote about fuel oil which is ... based on what you said to me about it ... it ... is sort of like oil slide and its use in shifts ... so why should investors care about this to ... yet has the consistency of of very very dirty ... smelly peanut butter ... and aam why should you care about ... is the literally the bottom of the barrel ... it is I mean except the stuff they use to pay for roads now which is um not liquidity more ... so it's smooth or chunky piece ... is that that that that ... had better be smooth because I know with the with the tongue to be ... I mean look if you ... here's our came in a bizarre came but ... surprisingly imported ... so ... if you are not here in St in Ike was uh hundred people on the Street is a veteran of the the International Maritime Organization ... I think ... probably hundred ... abundant with ... him ... shrug their shoulders ... and Dom ... that effect I've not heard of it ... the the the ... but they have a big impact possibly on what you pay the proper really big impact with ten to twenty percent ... of these for awhile ... if things go the way the Pentagon looks like they will ... because ... of most goods are moved by see lots and lots of ten billion pounds the year of Oil materials and TV sets and ... and whatever all know that the stuff that that we ... rely on for life ... and the ships that move it around to it pretty cheaply but one of the reasons they do it so cheaply ... is the use this really awful ... fuel ... that is the bottom the barrel ... Bashneft heated up some turns liquid ... aam because they're out at sea ... and the smoke belching their nap ... will heal ... a ... gallon up of this stuff compared to say ... on the road diesel ... puts out about three thousand five hundred times as much emissions ... and the general rule change they wanna bring that down to just five hundred but but but but ... there's a problem with that is that you can just wave a magic wand and do that refineries are not really able to get all that you know kind of much cleaner fuel ... on above a barrel of oil ... so then if you'll turn as they can find more oil like two million barrels or so more which is like ... of a lot as they say the ships are gonna have to upgrade to a higher quality oh ... that's right so I you guys gotta find another Kuwait ... can overnight ... aam ... or ... you can ... make a lot of expensive investments in refineries than I could be ready to do that ... so the bottom line is that ... once they have to do that the ship served going to find fuel but didn't have to pay a lot more for fuel and there to be using fuel that you will be used for other stuff like diesel ... and stuff like that of diesel gets more expensive than ... the next thing up ... which is jet fuel gets more expensive the next thing up ... disgusting gets more expensive everything ... that's all that chronic sleep it's a cleaner product ... gets more expensive ... and ... possibly a lot more expensive than people a sort of not really paying attention to this issue ... this is NetEase this is coming into effect in ... twenty twenty is now rate that's right um so that that gives us a few years and it isn't the market Kinniry spawn isn't this a classic case where ... you know the market will make the investments necessary and to ... someone's can one arbitrage away that that even if there is that the little price bump ... and you know maybe things won't be so bad I mean France's China has a ton of overcapacity in refining and why can't they just make this feel ... when you commit to feel like I said you you can do that but you have to find another Kuwait's worth of oil and that's not so we seek to do or not you just don't look this week and use the same oil that you would use for this or you can use the same oil ... you can use the same world of the problem is that your or to use the normal for other stuff you can use the world why it's a mean you have to find new oil so you can run ... that would work you could run for so that the refineries are some refineries are ready in some refineries are not in a case of ... all long long time to get the stuff ready you can only squeeze so much good stuff out of ... the only critic and you know get out more than what you put and you're always going to have this light at the bottom ... what are the entities it for ships then you can you might not be a reason for what you may you continue this process this was a very expensive units ... and um some really big complex refineries can do that in some small refiners at the Swans in China the ... announcement and ... our Apsel in October to invest in that that this would be like to go ... like ... putting a kind of like the ... Lamborghini engine in the show that Brennan it's like is no ... known reason to tune in with that specific kind of unit on to that refinery ... as I know that that that's the first time in a mismatched mentioned issues that the next part Capstone Spencer has a lot about automobile ... also the man also dating myself ... with that but early enough so it's it's a big deal mean that the bottom line is you you you either have to ... aam ... build it from them in you know when refining don't just pull something on to refine and say ok here we go minutes ... it takes years ... and so we can see that enough to be ready ... but we all also can see that ... even if they are ready here in the ... more oil to ... to refine into itself ... and that the market will ... like you said the market will adapt ... but since it's an overnight change what I mean it you know if oil prices go up ... aam ... it's not always bad news writes that if you're putting gas in your car to go it was probably going up because the economy is booming or something like that demand is high but if oil prices go up I mean does this always the fear oil prices go up because some country goes up in flames or ... some vital waterway is blocked for a ... second dead weight loss to the world and that that will derive no benefit to the world The is no better ... and this is this is like ... when is the benefit of course and in terms of pollution because the this sulfur dioxide ... aam ... that is spewed into the atmosphere is ... very healthy for that but that's the kind of you know they benefit that's hard to ... master inside a ... an ... immediate economic benefit where is that the cost is going to be ... immediate discount this is due to December thirty first you don't need to do this and generate first you need to do this ... that is the question I have is heated shipping industry has been just buffeted for the last few years of overcapacity in ... him bankruptcies in an all this and and ... he had to what it appeared investor a new thing about how this ... is in fact oil and its XP at the pump but ... this sounds like a you know a real squeeze for ... an already set of very weak company so ... are they pushing after they do they want this to be delayed for another five years and with it that way yet so the with the way works is that they they did push for of for glaze and then it's been talked about for a long long time internship in circles ... and shipping guys are freaking out because this guy make shipping A lot more expensive ... was the makes shipping more expensive for everyone the people who should be freaking out ... are these the people who own mostly older ships because it's not ... you can do something to ship to score of the the emissions ... so that you can use this dirty stuff and then um ... you know you what I wanna invest in an old ship and put in this know you never do that but they can cause a twelve million dollars in oh and that the shipping ... the whole should they be worth ten million dollars it's in a way like that question ... um you know I mean ... so every year you wouldn't you wouldn't do that for brand newly built ship you can you can do that or for other EMU ship you can do it ... and but the other thing is that this is gonna make ... things cost more in the housing activity oil ... but I mean ... not just a little but everything that's ... poll by share rate as I'm that's delivered by ship which could be any consumer product that's right and all that stuff can be can get a lot more expensive ... odd you can get ... about ten to twenty percent more expensive that is hers retailers at a time when they're also notched a pair that's right and that effect you you'll get Sonic loyal to the triple whammy for will to someone you have these other effects but then ... just bringing a barrel oil for Middle East ... would be about a dollar more expensive affair ... that's like two percent more expensive ... on top of all these other issues that I the diaries so ... it's um ... you know it's like a real sleeper issue but it it it could have a big impact ... we are going to take a quick break when we come back more on the shock that could be coming to the oil market ... make sure to check out the future and everything I can speak as the future is close to anything ... on you at the Senate's each Friday in gin The Wall Street Journal listen and viciously stay ahead of that time ... they on top of the market ... this is ... her down the street ... from Wall Street ... so Spencer I'm an investor and I listen to this podcast which of course a shed aam I do now body position myself unprepared for this oil supply disruption that occurs in January twenty ... one E ... but what are the chances that you know ... by then will become the no ... I'm not a few him to play out says referring to before is a skinny be ... the lights UK this time I mean will be a have found some new way to adapt by then or ... is it ... almost certainly can it be worse than people expect ... no I mean they're a lot of the slotted in between I mean you're absolutely right if I don't think it'll be complete like alike UK like a Nothing burger ... but I think that he could be less severe than some people projecting because ... people might cheat ... and ... the dirty stuff anyway ... um ... in all all kinds of things ... on the onthe other hand ... aam you can prepare as an investor I mean this is going to ... get the pizzas badges and some people fear ... is going to stoke inflation ... it's going to ... um you know you may want to invest in people who consists of props like hydrogen which you need to take the soul for ... other fuel so there's the companies that you ... are in the business of partition ... you may want to invest in like two new ... companies newer ships and our older ships ... all kinds of things that you have rippled ... get trickle down effects from up from this ... aam but you're right it could be bought by the time we get to it or could be postponed or people may ... wake up in the non shipping world and the like ... we're going to do what you know and and ... delay a door ... when he gave the the the impact was the CEO ... how severe is going to be this is not on anyone's radar now ... that is very interesting and we are going to keep it on our radar ... we are going to have ended there that wraps things up for this week spurred on the Street podcast ... please join us every week for the latest in a global investing ... for more please check this out at WS J dot com slashed for ... that's the view and stay dot com slashed her ... you can also email us with your comments suggestions or questions ... at the current podcast at WSJ dot com ... from a dark and eerie and got free ... on behalf of the best of record on the Street team thanks for listening ... follow the law Street Journal in your favorite podcast that sex WSJ on Apple podcasts I have a radio spot by Google Play Music ... stitcher and any Amazon
