Caterpillar, Procter & Gamble, DuPont
By 
 Jan 27, 2015 9:46 am ET 
 

Getty Images
Among the companies with shares expected to actively trade in Tuesday’s session are Caterpillar, Procter & Gamble and DuPont
Caterpillar on Tuesday gave a disappointing outlook for 2015, citing plummeting commodity prices, as the heavy-machinery maker also reported results in its December quarter that missed expectations.
Procter & Gamble warned Tuesday that its efforts to slim down and speed sales growth by shedding brands are being overshadowed by “unprecedented currency devaluations.” P&G also reported results in its December quarter that missed expectations.
DuPont said Tuesday it will meet its goal to cut $1 billion in costs well ahead of schedule, but warned that a strengthening dollar will hurt its earnings this year.
Pfizer issued downbeat guidance for the new year as it reported a decline in sales in the most recent period. The company’s results beat expectations, however.
American Airlines Group said Tuesday lower fuel prices led to better-than-expected fourth-quarter earnings but noted that results were hurt by costs related to repatriating funds in Venezuela.
Peabody Energy slashed its quarterly dividend and the coal producer projected a much wider-than-expected loss for the current quarter.
Bristol-Myers Squibb reported stronger-than-expected fourth-quarter revenue, boosted by strong sales of its key drugs and despite a hit from the divestiture of its diabetes business last year and impacts from a stronger dollar.
Lockheed Martin offered a downbeat profit outlook for the year while the defense contractor posted growth in profit and revenue. The company’s earnings for the most recent quarter missed analysts’ expectations, but sales surpassed them.
Corning said Tuesday that continued demand for its specialty materials, along with revenue growth from its acquisition of a Korean LCD-glass manufacturer, drove stronger-than-expected results for the fourth quarter.
R.R. Donnelley & Sons has offered to buy book company Courier Corp. for $265 million, a week after it agreed to be purchased by rival printing company Quad/Graphics Inc. for $235 million.
Freeport-McMoRan said Tuesday that it has slashed its capital budget for the year and is searching for outside funding for its oil and gas business as the mining company seeks to shield itself from plummeting commodity prices.
Danaher said sales rose a better-than-expected 2.9% in the fourth quarter, but the industrial and health-care equipment company lowered its earnings guidance for the full year, blaming the stronger dollar.
Microsoft on Monday said its earnings fell more than 10% during the quarter ended December on costs related to its streamlining effort and its integration of the mobile phone business acquired from Nokia last year.
United Technologies cut its 2015 sales and profit forecasts as the strengthening dollar takes a bite out of overseas sales of its jet engines, elevators and other heavy equipment.
Lattice Semiconductor agreed to buy fellow semiconductor producer Silicon Image Inc. in a deal with an equity value of about $600 million, the companies said Tuesday.
Facebook on Tuesday denied being the victim of a hacking attack and said its site and photo-sharing app Instagram had suffered an outage after it introduced a configuration change.
 Share this:
