Kim Dickens' Path to 'Fear the Walking Dead'
This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.
coming up on today's Speakeasy podcast were talking with here the walking dead skin Dickens who explains who is wise on the shares are so popular these days ... more ... metaphors for it and anxieties and fears deep ones where our daily ones that is always there ... creep in a minute minute display and zombies left and right every time we all like everyday ... this is WSJ's Speakeasy your source for entertainment ... pop culture celebrity ... I ... look into the law Street Journal's Speakeasy Park asthma name is Mike Ayers and Arch entertainer reporter here to turn off tastiest is one the most common pick actors working today convictions over the last fifteen years she's been in pre much every creed show from ... deadlift Last ... lights to sons of anarchy ... the list goes on ... now she stars and names he's Fear The Walking Dead is Maddie ... the nature of the survivors as well as ... featured will ... Netflix's delicious medical drama House of Cards cam ... come thanks for joining us ... thanks for having me ... so when your first earnings ... did you ever think you'd one day be acting next to zombies ... attack ... no I didn't imagine that I don't know what I imagined and it certainly wasn't that ... you were to see you train here in York yes ... yes ... ok on ... to the desert it was that the early nineties when you're you're here ... he and eleven ... a yet with the year I went to American Academy demand current system that is a little ... summer program first at least rostered PSG a minute ... and from there nice to see that ... the teachers and his team ... keeps this up I still say ... he still study Eleanor those early days ... like really sitcom ... he did did you find it on ... I ... love to have the green in your city I loved being in acting school ... I was a waitress ... I was able to ... paint Brent in Manhattan ... and the additions in Manhattan on it it doesn't really happen anymore or so ... I ... it was and ... is pretty exciting time ... we're eleven ... while I lived in the still rich Iran and Telsey coupling from places and for the longest period of debt directly across the street an associate of ... oh two grand prices back then were this like ... I think it started out at four eighteen four eighteen PM ... four hundred and eighteen hours this correct ... I ... um ... my direct link back in order to my people into in two thousand for ... for a really tiny place ... aam on the upper East side ... was twelve years ... so spring in his pre K is pretty is not for a team to it but it's too ... the still ... pretty good at me did you find ... living in the city tough and I mean it's ... how ... you are young Raytheon candidates ... you know it's the Pixies very competitive ... um did you find ... that way at all ... I ... and there's really aware of the competitiveness and it was ... Eon and the dead parrot without knowing anyone just wanting to school and ... the new deal is this family you're after then ... he now is it was pretty exciting and ten ... so at times that of dangerous him ... aam ... the iShares competitiveness you know once I started ... going on auditions and things like that for my career ... this year for several years without that ... on ... once I started going into ... I don't I just I it was ... sometimes I would question myself label I ... be doing my airy doing this you know ... it does seem like such a shoot than units when that didn't exist ... I just think too much about it I just kept showing up in trying in ... him showing up in those auditioning for the ... time the girls I some Nic working in a selling isn't until June charitable still you know working yes the the stone ... a aam ... it's an inexpensive was a whirlwind ... is there any alternatives in your mind or was was this kind of ... man that was the scary thing did have an alternate care ... who and where does he remind you the waitress ... unless you are and where where ... I ... but the list are you on the main places nameplates cowgirl Hall of Fame ... I don't know if this really is ... it's a it's in southern master of a and and down in the West Village and hats and tenth streets in there for ... so is this ... it's great it's ... going on sex the city it's great he ... said increases in other news yet we ... I ... amid ... the corridor to the family back in Alabama Stocks about this man with a concerned ... of this career choice ... yet I think they'll our ... own ... my father was an musician and singer and songwriter and artist so ... I was exposed to things like that that certain the Colts are bad ... I don't think they ... you know ... no one never really ... ventured out and ... try to do and I was doing ... and then there was just concerned for him ... she won me to be okay to be taken care of him ... and ... Korean shares and ... so at times she she thought ... year to come home and and the newscaster ... I assume will ... you really hate ... it's ok to be on TV and I don't really ... know Tampico wannabe journalist ... you know ... SAN and she ... she suggested maybe try something behind the scenes in ... McCain was the concern ... anyway she's ... always been very sport ... Suarez is the detective he ... was the biggest thing the you tube site you think that really hope to break into the industry ... them in the second thing that I think those perpetual for whatever Korean years here come and go for you now ... know whether it's ... being a writer marketer or ... or whatever you want on now how do you ... break into ... and that's a assertive ... African away it seems ... I mean ... I'd I'd been to school event in American can international pressure a man ... at a school for awhile and ... and has started a theater company was some friends and ... just was doing things that way grassroots in ... friends recommended another class to take ... his teacher caught up in a nineteen ninety ... and I went into that classes to take another class once a week ... to attack last minute ... it kind of felt like things clicked for me ... everything Handler intuitive ... channel ... in the class it is also that came together made him since then ... she's a wonderful teacher she still teaches ... and ... a lot of actors and there were all they'll have a chance and they were working ... and there was that there are so many facets to the class but let things go as he now ... Sir focused on owning ... what works about you ... that kind of change things about herself in ... and ... just be very present in yourself is are taught me how to walk into the rain ... in addition means is something that ... the starting place ... didn't do work and ... I mean that fell and hit the big moment ... you're learning presents you know like that the ability to be present in aam it's the ... it has cut in confession right now way ... you get to ... here yet to be relieved and teach yourself how to do that at least have someone they tell you ... know this is ... and this is how you get ahead if you want to you know really ... really succeed in them but it's you can toss money but it's not ... that easy to ... some are necessary ... in its turn ... um ... you can see yourself common goal oriented person like back then that you have like you keep yourself timelines few theory ... um ... you know ... and ... head down pursuit of ... goals ... known ... a guy and I just live where there when to me at times that ... UEFA me ... my head down at once and analysts said ... get real pictures and ... and I it's a picture soon said ... I ... and Senator ... and I think a scent that he would go by the stickers SNL French feel so old and new my ... Ukrainian of all this he did say you're going to backfire ... well as a deadly stickers this Aneel French bookstore of other places you could send out your headshot before it was ... he now ... for the big used to to not send them in water ... so ... I think one week and after like thirty five ... percent of thirty five ... network ... uncommon for one of the night at the time they can make it a bit ... it's the ... it's just ... it says you know ... tiny mean if it is so much of it is black ... his talent and ... there's also to take perseverance and an optimism to ... surly had to be optimistic person to sit on a week in ... New York City I know not allow the party ... this stock on the loops that which your head in non blue yet okay yes and down ... and a hope for the best ... and and ... you have to be a middle class class for type of person ... Toynbee dad as well as having all those things ... perseverance and lock ... in ... it's a nice time ... aam ... so ... that big break we consider that big break the the the can set you on ... one ... the path they use ... done the last five ten years ... the great estimate a bikini ... or the one thousand and ten ... he hadn't won the one that you credit as just like the turning point ... of ... her career ... while I think ... the first job I get it was a big deal ... and that was good to know ... corrective and retail and it was ... as they began to get closer and closer ... on that job Auditioning for it the casting Eaton said ... many say that's a nice feeling agents in a candy Gemini and it's getting a job and that's ... that was a huge turning point and I'd I went in there after ... thinking it was some nineteen and non union job and I got in there and I ... went to sign in sheet nice I everyone's name on their lives ... big agencies taxes and a man ... known as Dana Bailey ... got back and then I would say turning point later on would be ... calmly ... different ... because ... I think the most of the sun shall we all had a career ... and certainly been working in ... but some things to crystallize I was a ... turning point for many ... Rosetta auditioned like ... then it yet and in addition you and you know as ... I'm in a series with David knots before called big apple ... Ray Ernst CBS ... and ... you know that less likely that the Senate and is ... meant for cable ... but ... that's a handgun and and and met him on that and he cast me and I and so ... I mean I wasn't ... in the first two episodes a day when when when the smoke a new character ... he just ... he got me for ... it's nice ... it's very nice ... yes so that ALM so that he didn't know we are way past the apple ... was kind of break before the jury share Sharia ... why did the show lasted EPA's years ... has been stance that ... it it was re was FBI isn't cops ... working together and then and ... his dark ... creepy funny ... is funny too funny as well ... well it is seen in a mean Amway and ... and O'Neill was the lead is fantastic ... as always and he ... was a great crew ... history and ... slow was about that when you think and connect with people in it and you go ... you know ... the seasons but people ... certainly serve as a very ... active coffee and it's still Tuesday and ... and aam ... you know I think it's ID and ... in the industry behind the scenes like you know it's it's now a aam ... as the actors producers and writers TV shows like they ... look for that for inspiration teams I ... how we think really ... connected with that that show ... and I mean I think they ... yet was an example ... giving ... creative license ... to this ... Mario creative genius ... and then I mean we ... it took courage NAHB as car we didn't have full scripts you know we would show up and pages at a time and ... and and ... I think the big ... during peak the actors you were ... malleable and ... and easy to work with in that way and ... he was on set with this all the time the was inspired by real life things that were happening for people live like that and showing ... times and ... I ... I think he and David gave creative license to Janie Bryant costumes and ... I mean she said to maintain intercepting any ... they just let her go ... I ... she's brilliant in ... that time he may ... think at that point you'd been ... you know around ... such that we ... mean is that ... you consider that pre revolutionary when your company ... the chill enough to work like now how crazy that ... seems is in you know ... the ... TV shows or the BB production lots of ... sleek kitchen ... now lots of seats in the kitchen as well you know ... aam ... play ... that certainly seems like it was a aam ... very creative L for everybody there was maybe that was what fosters everything that just ... from the Fort Macon ... performances and in the stories and just why he was he were to get out and everybody I aam ... that atmosphere maybe ... this part ... yes I think it was ... a was magical ... how creative it was really in this lake ... he never knew would be a work at night and and see the thoroughfare ... marking exterior see if there's an app that night ... in this dispute sparkle ... the set to sparkle because I think it there was that amount of creative freedom to it ... and ... aam ... heart ... and faith without you know ... I think it's it's for probably afraid to come out ... to the SEC had a you know because they're at it when it was an Orthodox really though it has been done in ... so ... I think that the key to the magic in it he eats beyond sad and ... I think we'd be all the nonsense that ... nothing quite like ... I did it was special in its east and there you'd think ... his smile and the ... ones ... that end here ... the transformative experience ... aam is that seem like forever does like in the ... middle of last decade they really that is does that is about nine years through my mind ten years news that yet ... and ... in you know they really shouldn't ... the recent in DC now and I think that ... I think there are ... still bound to happen I know I have my ... lunch with David recently and leaves writing it's ... all very exciting and as close as it's ever been and I think everybody would be ... unit and peer groups to make it happen ... after rising stars making schedules ... or her ... a kid ... Iran take a quick break we're talkin with Kim Dickens today ... on Veronica Dagher and I want to retire rich have that you can listen to the watching your love podcast up you get there for more information check is that it the beest dot com slashed podcast ... by the Sun nineteen stitcher and now spotted by ... WSJ podcast listen ambitiously ... this is WSJ's Speakeasy your source for entertainment ... pop culture celebrity ... I ... below a compact they were talkin with convictions from here the walking dead ... can ... I with this show within walking Dead EU aam ... have the luxury of working ... on a on a program that has the pretty rabbit candies Kazak spirits and for you so far ... Johnny ... me know that we were lucky to have a ... keen and ... very ... passionate mobilized audience that was created in earned by the walking dead ... they were frigid have them look our way to miss a chance ... I think on the second round so ... they likely have ... a nice and ... dedicated fan base right now and it's fun it's fun to have that much ... energy and a missionary notes being seen you know people excited about a nap ... is a lot of fan interaction is a live talk conditionally do afterwards with ... an interaction in you know it from ... him they dissect everything ... he added that everything every word every day ... the head scratch and you may do ... a ... lot to look for meaning ... when sometimes people just scratched or ... nyet ... aam I'm certain oneness people at the time ... um ... if ... you've been in this world for are one of the year year and a half now working on the show ... the the Musk's earned um ... you know what your big takeaway on my next with people ... a quid speaks to write this ... now the zombie genre it's um ... it's very popular but a ... it is always curious about why people like to show up and watched dead people can treat the ... people ... you know it's it's an easy ... it's perplexing ... I can think is ... is that they're ... a ... bit more ... he noted alas I think it's this ... is really ... I think they're metaphors unlocking that are metaphors for an iron ... anxieties and fears ... deep ones where our daily runs to the site ... which is always there ... creep in a minute minute display in zombies left and right ... every time we all like every day you know ... so I mean there's that but ... it's and ... it's also ... the genre allows for this you know ... I I ... whirled with high stakes in and ... in any can play out these ... these ... I think very primitive fears that we have like what if ... I can protect my family in myself what if the government betrays me ... what if there's an outbreak of virus free ... you know ... and one s and what would I do ... and how would I ... where would I be willing to go however my moral compass change ... any people can dance or to relieve some of that anxiety by ... you know ... playing it out and this really experiencing at Lichter the show and they can ... turn down from there ... I ... yet these is certainly does speak exactly years mainly ... in size as it did ... description about ... things creeping up around the it's the zombies do the ... very pattern known as the Swiss ... Olympic sprinters aam ... by any means but a ... you know they are ... are fearful when there's a certain ... against paranoia that you know Kirk and the folks love the new costly introduce whether it's human on human paranoia ... and or are you know zombie on him Annapurna and ... the ... the idea of making quick decisions ... and ... what you can be in what is in what this second this season seems to really be ... exploring and everybody some more of ... you know the others ... on where your character specifically steams Pike's ... you know ... really realizing what's at stake and ... there's people that the people but that's boundary of the white is the ... the most scary aspect about this new reality ... it's ... it's what humans have turned into ... an can now ... mom ... and this has been a look at your body work in a U Ahmed ... if ... he knows ... is she seems like such a new type of person for you to explore is that this is pretty accurate ... yes and no I'm ... I mean at first glance for me a lesson in them are again until it to my area was him ... I'm familiar with playing ... women who are struggling ... to learn them from somewhere ... in there is something ... that maybe we don't know what it is somehow we reaffirm just another victim ... so I'll say reliance has that first year at first I thought that John was not for me or ... I was not for the genre I dun have not done the genre before and ... didn't think it fit in and then I start to realize him ... dead lift in interim name or both apocalyptic in no way in the Deadwood is the Wild Last ... allowance community ... where disease is rampant in and no one was protected and then came a day ... I use Katrina annual Island spell betrayed by their government and ... he know ... victims of ... natural disasters so ... steaks or a life or death ... in all of its ... shares ... it was a way to do when did you make that connections is a very ... an intriguing mix and you know that ... while last the zombie apocalypse the post Katrina ... they all can kind ... to start with a few of them the same you know it's just a ... different context them ... aam visited the view that it was the first said for seasoned pre much downbeat I realize area Kyle make ... those things that yet yet ... hey did aam you know we we talked about the locksmith and Mason you it's me options for consuming TV new niece's day ... these days is the industry preferred do you think ... these days in verses like maybe ten or twenty years ago like there's more opportunity but it may be harder to find ... you know ... people to watch there's so much choice ... I ... I don't know if the industry's tougher I just know ... I can't ... speak to that really ... don't know because I have been on you know I am confident remain too ... was for its streaming in TV ... and from Germany to house the cars too ... I ... him back onto ... cable cable yes ... yesterday and say can and sell ... I ... just now as a healer ... it's hard to find the time of the chosen one ally ... is there such an abundance of material you watch on TV ... I don't have as much time is at nineteen ... I feel I can actually I wanna watch second season of Parker's so badly and I just ... can't do now ... some broad city I love the city so if I leave ... you in a year ago ... here ... yet mean there is certainly ... an honor ... did the man a choice that of your paths it's ... just keeps kind of expanding ... its can really think that we think this is that it is is is ... it's the ... what it says the opportunity for people is great I have is a lot of Crete on people and home ... and there's an opportunity for new people coming up ... you know your show your walking Dead features a lot in the face this man in my opinion ... um I hadn't seen them for the army had been working ... on that this was this was their break this to visit their Deadwood and on and on and alot awaits and a ... keynote that's that's good you know ten years ago there's no shows about zombies on major cable network ... just the ... the things that people can do and can play with and storytelling ... it's great ... now ... who has seen on time to consume all of this thank you ... you really have to think ... as you are just saying make ... just pick your ... just take things and ... Anaconda ... for the bass can and you know there's no fear of missing now ... he had to leave the fear of missing out feelings aam ... step aside but you know ... and that can of fuel that can and then ... no concrete social media creates a mom ... and needed anxiety ... learned this recently ... turned off ... all my social media and e mail or the tapes ... ok just ... disconnected with ... with with everything I came back as victims things ... make me feel ... anxious online ... because ... I see you ... the constant chatter ... of why ... people are consuming a loving and watching and it's ... can it do I need to be doing this tonight ... not be doing this and doing this ... is due ... to constant circle of ... questions ... its ... been around ahead so ... you know ... I think it's just ... I'm not on a comment how people have time to watch everything ... um but ... on ... a unit in a person ... a key scene in a lot yet yet that I'm that that is TMI social media make a hat from ... just one foot in there you know I'd I'd know they should do more and yet ... in ... the U N things instead ... and think it is ... certainly ... he has to say he a either ... listen you're working all ... a little worrying all the time I see some people that are able to work and ... stick things in stockpile things they're ready to go in and it's a it's it's fun I can see how it's really fun but ... I'm just doing anything ... the as I am working on ... this the did did you think the year has a pretty comfy shelf life is to keep you busy for awhile ... I certainly hope so ... and because I think this there's so many places to go with the story as a rarity certain ... as if it is Ardi showing him either so many avenues to explore and assertive early on in the apocalypse ... and and in a different country ... so ... hopes and I'm actually ... really enjoying it ... a few of pink scamper joining us we appreciate it ... thanks fatten me my current thanks for tuning in today for more podcast check this out into the shade dotcoms High's Park has followers on Twitter at the issue ... has become a subscriber on iTunes or stitcher personify and now look for something to play music ... on Android devices ... thanks for listening ... WSJ podcast listen ambitiously
