Today’s Top Supply Chain and Logistics News From WSJ
Getting bigger ships into the U.S. East Coast’s biggest port is getting more expensive even with the main part of the project already completed. The cost for raising the Bayonne Bridge for the Port of New York and New Jersey is rising by another $90 million, the WSJ’s Paul Berger reports, adding new expenses to a project that was already $300 million over budget and two years behind schedule. The engineering feat of raising the roadway is part of the many billions of dollars being spent around the world to match the new, larger scale of container ships—an effort that’s grown more urgent at some ports since the opening of an expanded Panama Canal. New York-area officials say the $1.7 billion bridge project is part of the cost of maintaining the port’s place in maritime supply chain. Bigger ships are coming in and port container volumes are rising as promised, but the problem is that the costs seem to be rising just as fast. 
  General Motors Co. is building the future of its pickup trucks on the expensive and complicated supply chain for carbon fiber. The auto maker plans to start using the lightweight product in the premium versions of its pickups, the WSJ’s Mike Colias writes, to help the company stay competitive in a crucial vehicle category. Replacing far heavier aluminum and steel would help the company comply with tougher regulatory standards by making the vehicles more fuel-efficient, but GM would have to charge a premium for the trucks. Auto makers have been working with carbon fiber producers to ready the material for auto production, and researchers say carbon fiber prices have been falling. Carbon fiber is complicated and time-consuming to produce, however, and so GM would likely have to reset production operations by having fully formed parts shipped to its plants. The costs and complexity could improve if GM’s use pushes broader adoption of the material at auto factories. 
 Luxury retailers can stop online marketplaces at the digital door, at least in Europe. The European Union’s top court handed high-end brands a big victory by ruling they can restrict retailers from selling their products on web platforms, the WSJ’s Natalia Drozdiak and Matthew Dalton report, setting a new barrier in an ongoing battle between suppliers and online sellers. The decision gives luxury companies a powerful tool in Europe to safeguard their exclusivity, which has become a key concern as the sector expands online sales. Marketplaces are looking to expand their reach, and third-party sellers often use Amazon.com Inc. to sell luxury goods, setting up distribution channels that the brands say undermine their image and their pricing. The ruling sets up a trans-Atlantic divide over online sales even as many retailers and sellers push for more cross-border e-commerce. U.S. law limits the ability of brands to control how their goods are sold once they are distributed to wholesalers.
ECONOMY & TRADE

 The Bayonne Bridge. Photo: Bloomberg News 
 Talk in Washington about resetting North American trade isn’t slowing down automotive supply chains in Mexico. Mexico’s production and exports of light vehicles this year through November have already surpassed the record levels set in 2016, the WSJ’s Anthony Harrup reports, as demand increases from the U.S. and Canada. Mexican manufacturers say the record output consolidates Mexico’s position as the world’s fourth-largest exporter and seventh-largest producer of vehicles. The growth has put Mexico’s auto industry at the center of negotiations with the U.S. and Canada to change the North American Free Trade Agreement, raising concerns in the auto industry about the impact on their supply chains. The new figures suggest the stakes for auto makers—production so far this year is up 9.4% and exports were up 12% over last year. U.S. auto imports from Mexico slipped in November, but that trade is up 9.3% over the course of the year. 
QUOTABLE
 ‘If we do get to $60, it’s all guns blazing all over again. There is no such thing as a Texas wildcatter getting religion. ’ 
—Jan Stuart of Cornerstone Macro, on the prospects that U.S. shale drillers will maintain discipline in oil and gas production.
Number of the Day
0.9% 
Year-over-year decline in commodity carloads carried by U.S. railroads in November, according to the Association of American Railroads.
IN OTHER NEWS
U.S. labor productivity rebounded in the third quarter while hourly wages rose moderately. (WSJ) 
Australia’s economy grew at a slower pace than expected in the third quarter. (WSJ) 
Low food prices are denting the economies of U.S. farm states. (WSJ) 
Store owner Hudson’s Bay Co. will boost its digital efforts after online sales growth slowed sharply in the latest quarter. (WSJ) 
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. is changing its formal name to Walmart Inc., nodding to consumer trends away from physical stores. (WSJ) 
 Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc. is taking a minority stake in Chinese retail pharmacy Sinopharm Holding Guoda Drugstores Co. (WSJ) 
JD.com wants to use a drone fleet in Canada to ferry goods to international export gateways. (Toronto Global and Mail) 
 Airbus SE is speeding up jet deliveries after clearing a bottleneck with engine supplier Pratt & Whitney. (Reuters) 
The U.S. General Accountability Office is launching a probe into the safety of increasingly long freight trains. (Reuters) 
A labor dispute is causing long cargo backlogs at Australia’s Port of Melbourne. (Sydney Morning Herald) 
Mining giant Rio Tinto expects Chinese demand to help drive 4% annual growth in aluminum production in coming years. (Aluminum Insider) 
Bulk shipping operators are increasingly optimistic about demand growth heading into 2018. (Lloyd’s List) 
China’s Zhuhai Port plans to raise $224 million in a share offering to launch a fleet of regional bulk transport vessels. (Splash 24/7) 
European regulators approved Cosco Shipping Holdings’ acquisition of the parent of Orient Overseas Container Line. (American Shipper) 
 HD Supply ’s sales jumped 7.5% in the third quarter on fast-rising demand in construction and industrial markets. (Industrial Distribution) 
Discount retailer Big Lots Inc. is putting a 1.35 million-square-foot distribution center in Southern California. (Columbus Dispatch) 
Construction began on an industrial park near Allentown, Pa., that will include a million-square-foot distribution center. (Reading Eagle) 
Silicon Valley industrial automation startup Fetch Robotics raised $25 million in a Series B funding round. (VentureBeat) 
Regional shipping line Crowley Maritime Corp. is restructuring its business units as it focuses more on government-related business. (MarineLink) 
ABOUT US
Paul Page is deputy editor of WSJ Logistics Report.  Follow the WSJ Logistics Report on Twitter at @WSJLogistics.
 Write to Paul Page at paul.page@wsj.com
