CNN Profiles - Stephanie Elam - Correspondent - CNN
About 
Stephanie Elam is a correspondent for CNN based in Los Angeles. Elam made her return to the network in 2013 after spending a year with KNBC Los Angeles.
Elam has recently covered the shooting of unarmed teenager Michael Brown in Ferguson, MO, the Donald Sterling scandal of the Los Angeles Clippers owner's racist remarks, weather related emergencies including the EF5 tornado which killed 15 adults and 9 children while devastating the town of Moore, Oklahoma; as well as numerous fires in California, flooding in Arizona, and sub-zero temperatures in Minnesota. She was one of the first reporters on the scene after a shooting at Los International Airport stranded thousands of travelers and took the life of TSA agent Gerardo Hernandez, marking the first on-duty death since the security organization was created in 2001. Additionally, Elam was responsible for reporting on 19 firefighters killed in a wildfire in Prescott, Arizona, informing the world of the largest loss of first responders in a single event since September 11, 2001.
Prior to rejoining CNN, Elam served as a weekend evening anchor and general assignment reporter for KNBC. During her tenure at KNBC, her reporting centered around emergency awareness, empowering Southern Californians with information to be earthquake ready, water safe and informed about money matters. She covered the release of John Smith, a man jailed 18 years for a crime he did not commit; the 2012 Golden Globes red carpet; and she anchored KNBC's breaking news coverage of the Seal Beach murders.
Before KNBC, Elam was business news correspondent for CNN based in New York, where she also reported for HLN and CNN International. Elam covered a myriad of stories from the worst financial period in decades to the death of Michael Jackson during her time at CNN from 2003 to 2011.
Elam's career began in New York as a copy editor for Dow Jones Newswires before joining Bridge News where she helped coordinate seamless 24-hour news coverage among the organizations newsrooms worldwide.
While working for Bridge News, she made the transition to broadcast news when she began covering corporate earnings for the PBS program Nightly Business Report and for WebFN. As the only full-time reporter in New York for WebFN, she anchored Market on the Close, a one-hour WebFN program that tracked the stock market in the last hour of trading and First Business, a weekly syndicated business program
Elam co-hosted Black Enterprise Report, a nationally syndicated program focused on business, career and financial education from 2005 to 2007.
Elam earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in broadcast journalism from Howard University.
