CNN Profiles - Pamela Brown - Senior  Correspondent - CNN
About 
Pamela Brown is based in CNN's Washington, D.C. bureau and serves as the network's Justice and Supreme Court correspondent covering law enforcement, as well as issues related to the Department of Justice and the U.S. Supreme Court. Brown also serves as a key fill-in anchor for CNN Newsroom. 
Since joining the network in 2013, Brown has reported on several breaking news stories including the Boston marathon bombings, the Cleveland kidnappings, the historic Supreme Court same-sex marriage ruling and the San Bernardino and Brussels terrorist attacks. In 2015, Brown reported from Paris on the investigation into the terrorist killing rampage that began at the headquarters for the French newspaper, Charlie Hebdo. From Düsseldorf, Germany, she reported on the criminal investigation into the ill-fated Germanwings Flight 9525. 
Before shifting to the justice beat, Brown was a national correspondent reporting on a variety of topics for the network and contributed to CNN's morning program, New Day. 
Brown began her career at ABC7/WJLA-TV and NewsChannel8 in Washington D.C., where she became a Sunday evening anchor and an Emmy®-nominated special projects reporter covering several national and international stories. At the news desk, Brown anchored breaking news and continuous coverage on several high profile events, including Hurricane Sandy, a Washington Metro train derailment, and the 2010 historic East Coast blizzard. In addition, Brown was one of the few local journalists to travel to earthquake-ravaged Haiti in January 2010 and later returned on her own to report on the rebuilding process in Port-au-Prince and the surrounding areas.
Brown is also committed in the fight against human sex trafficking and has generated several reports on the widespread problem in the U.S. and abroad, and local police are now presenting her exclusive investigative reports at human trafficking conferences and schools to help educate students, teachers and the community on the crisis. Federal authorities also credit one of Brown's reports with leading to the arrest and conviction of a suspected child pornographer.
She grew up in Lexington, Ky. and holds a B.A. from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in broadcast journalism.
