Bill Clinton accusers slam wife's candidacy: 'Hillary is only for one woman, and that's herself'
Three women who have accused former President Bill Clinton of offenses ranging from sexual harassment to rape relived their encounters with him Thursday night. 
Juanita Broaddrick, Paula Jones and Kathleen Willey joined Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump at a news conference prior to Trump's debate with Hillary Clinton Sunday to discuss their experiences. On Thursday, they spoke to Fox News' Sean Hannity in an exclusive interview on "Hannity".
"I thought that we might possibly be able to bring this out and influence people," said Broaddrick, a former nursing home administrator who claimed she was raped by Bill Clinton during his campaign for Arkansas governor in 1978, "and be able to tell them that Hillary is not for all women. Hillary is only for one woman and that’s herself."
"Everybody is calling Bill Clinton's crimes infidelities," said Willey, a former Clinton White House volunteer who in March 1998 accused Bill Clinton of assaulting her five years earlier. "Rape, sexual assault, sexual harrassment ... are not infidelities. They are crimes and misdemeanors." 
All three women accused Bill or Hillary Clinton of pressuring them to keep quiet about their alleged assaults. Broaddrick described an encounter with Hillary Clinton weeks after her busband, then the Arkansas attorney general, allegedly attacked her.
"She comes straight to me and says to me, big smile, very pleasant voice, says to me, 'I’m Hillary Clinton. It’s so nice to meet you. I just want to thank you for everything that you do for Bill’s campaign,'" Broaddrick said. 
At that point, she added, Clinton grabbed Broaddrick's arm, pulled her close and said, "Do you understand everything you do?"
"I felt like at that moment, she knew everything and was saying, 'You better keep quiet,'" Broaddrick said Thursday.
When asked why she didn't go to the police, Broaddrick said of Bill Clinton, "He could close the doors of my business ... He was the police."
The future 42nd president asked Paula Jones, a former Arkansas state employee, to keep quiet about their alleged encounter in May 1991.
"He said, 'You're a smart girl, let's keep this between ourselves,'" said Jones, who later sued Clinton for sexual harassment.
Hannity was also joined by the fourth woman who appeared with Trump at the pre-debate press conference: Kathy Shelton, who says Hillary Clinton besmirched her character while defending a man Shelton accused of raping her when she was 12 years old in 1975. 
As part of her defense, Clinton (then known as Hillary Rodham), described Shelton in an affidavit as "emotionally unstable with a tendency to seek out older men and engage in fantasizing." She also accused Shelton of falsely claiming to have been attacked in the past.
"All of these things ... were intended to force Kathy to undergo further psychological evaluation and interrogation," Shelton's attorney Candice Jackson told "Hannity."
"If she was for children, she would not have put me through what I went through," Shelton added.
A decade later, Clinton was recorded telling an Arkansas newspaper that Shelton's attacker had passed a lie detector test, which as she put it, "forever destroyed my faith in polygraphs."
Shelton says the exchange proved Clinton attacked her in the affidavit despite knowing her client was guilty.
"She [was] gonna win her first case whatever it takes," Shelton said. "Whether she needs to lie, cheat or steal."
 Advertisement
