Scorpio Horoscopes: Daily, Love & Monthly Forecast
Weekly Love Horoscope
 Domestic matters might be a point of contention for you and your mate this week. While it's true that you'll have an easy time talking about the most delicate subject matter together, this won't guarantee that you'll be in agreement. Sure, you'll bring up whatever is going on in your family life that's causing the most distress. But then, instead of working together for a resolution, you might begin to feel as though you want two completely different outcomes. Suddenly, you might both become exasperated, thinking that the other has now become part of the problem and not the solution. Put this entire situation on the shelf this week if you can. Let the cosmic dust settle. 
 Your faith is unshakeable as 2018 begins, Scorpio. There is a decided spiritual focus in your world thanks to the beautiful and mystical Full Moon that lands in your 9th House of Beliefs and Values on January 1. This lunation is perfectly aligned to Jupiter and Mars -- both in your sign. As if that wasn't enough, la Luna is also making a stunning link to inspirational Neptune, now in your 5th House of Creativity and True Love. As a result, there is nothing you can't do as the New Year begins, as long as you release the magical powers of your faith into whatever it is you wish to achieve. Spiritual enlightenment, however, does seem to be the name of your game now. You are ready to spread your message out to others, and this message has something to do with healing and connecting to deep emotions. The best part is that, whatever this might entail, as you speak up boldly to heal others, you'll actually heal yourself in the process. Make no mistake about it though: in order to do this, you'll need to be brave. You'll need to be willing to say things that might trigger uncomfortable feelings in you and others. Thankfully, you'll have more courage to go deeper than anyone else. You are more than well-equipped. Later in the month you might be ready to work on a communications-related project that will require deep concentration. There is the capacity for you to become an expert at this -- whatever the topic might be. You might already be looked to as the wise elder in this arena by others (and it doesn't matter how young or old you are). If this is the case, you'll see it as both an honor and an awesome responsibility. You don't want to let anyone down with your words, so after January 16 you'll choose them more carefully than ever. Still, there might be an outburst in your work life around this time, so take care not to react to whatever a colleague or employee says to you. Silence is better than reckless communication. After January 17 there will be a gorgeous cycle of peace and harmony at home opening up for you, as Venus enters your 4th House of Family and Domestic Life. A career milestone or turning point is likely on January 31 when a powerful Lunar Eclipse lands at the top of your chart. Whatever this is, you've known about for quite some time. You're ready. 
 It'll be more important than usual for you to communicate with your lover this month about topics that carry significant weight in your life and in your relationship. If the two of you have recently been overcoming a relationship obstacle, it's clear that in the new year you're both committed to continuing this until you've reached victory. Until January 17, you'll have an added layer of support to help you talk about whatever might have created obstacles in the first place. If, for example, there has been a recent betrayal or disappointment in some way, you'll be able to convey to your partner that forgiveness is possible, but you are also drawing very clear boundaries to ensure your partner knows that you will not sacrifice your self-respect. Your partner is not only getting your message, he or she is also taking significant responsibility for anything he or she may have done to hurt you in the past. This might be more healing than either of you ever imagined, so if you love each other, keep holding on tight -- the universe is rooting for both of you. Jupiter in your sign through November 2018 will continue to protect you and serve as a buffering agent in your life and your relationships, softening any blows. If you're single, this will open the door for a powerfully fulfilling intimate relationship with someone special. In fact, a very sexy combination will occur for you on January 6 when Mars and Jupiter align in your sign. This is sexual healing at its finest. Use it well. 
 ADVERTISEMENT 
Sign up for HuffPost Horoscopes
There's a lot going on in your life right now. Get insight into what it all means with your daily horoscope.
