Carlota Zimmerman | HuffPost
BREAKING NEWS
Tap here to turn on desktop notifications to get the news sent straight to you.

 EDITION 
US
A former child actor on "Sesame Street," Carlota Zimmerman, J.D., is an honors graduate of Wellesley College, Middlebury College Language School (Russian) and Indiana University-Bloomington Maurer School of Law. In 2008, Carlota launched her coaching practice, www.carlotaworldwide.com, crafting personalized, empathetic solutions designed to help men and women around the world, achieve their personal and professional goals. Using personalized strategies, she has successfully coached attorneys, actors, veterans, doctors, TV anchors, stay-at-home parents, writers, artists and politicians. Carlota's clients are real men and women committed to doing the hard yet empowering work necessary to make effective comebacks in their own lives. Before opening her coaching practice, Carlota was a produced playwright and a network news journalist. A native New Yorker, she has lived and worked in Russia, India and China, and across the United States. She is fluent in Russian and English. At the age of 18, her first play, "Man at His Best,"​ won the 1991 Young Playwrights Festival and was produced off-Broadway. The play was favorably reviewed in New York Magazine, New York Times and Village Voice, and continues to be performed around the world. From 2010-2014, the play toured Brazil, at the behest of the Brazilian government. As a TV journalist, Carlota worked in the newsrooms of CNN, FOX News, ABC, MSNBC, Reuters and NBC News. Her beats included the Kremlin, Capitol Hill, the White House, and daily breaking news. In 2007, she received her juris doctorate. While a law student, Carlota interned for Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton, and clerked for Judge Obus of the New York State Supreme Court. Carlota's articles have been published by ESPN's The Undefeated, XOJane.com(http://www.xojane.com/issues/i-interviewed-donald-trump-and-i-pity-him?utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=social&xid=twitter), Above the Law, Thought Catalog, EliteDaily, MSNBC, and Eternal Remedy. She was named a "social media expert"​ by US News & World Report. Carlota has led career events and sat on panels at the NYC Bar Association, Social Media Week NYC 2015, BlogHer'15, Queens Chamber of Commerce, Queens Council on the Arts, New York Public Library, Chicago IP Law Association, CUNY, SUNY, SAG-AFTRA, and the 2016 Pennsylvania Conference for Women. In April 2016, Carlota gave the Keynote Address at Wellesley College's Latina Month Events. As an entrepreneur and coach, Carlota has been profiled in New York Post, Latina Magazine, the Wellesley Times and QueensLatino.com. In October 2016, Carlota was featured in New York Magazine:http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/10/8-women-on-making-a-career-change.html Her career advice has been cited by NY1, Fox 5, Washington Post, Associated Press, The Ladders, Glassdoor, NBC News, Telemundo, Bustle, Brit & Co., Wall Street Journal, CBS MoneyWatch, NY Times, Fast Company, CNBC, Moneyish, More.com, Mediabistro, Recruiter.com, Everup, Yahoo!, AOL, MSN Money Talks, The Cheat Sheet, The Street, Elite Daily and numerous other sites and publications. www.carlotaworldwide.com Facebook: Carlotaworldwide Success Strategist Instagram: @carlotazee
