Serial Killer Suspect Linked To Eerie Amazon Reviews
In a 2014 review for a lock, the account linked to Kohlhepp claimed to have five of them on a shipping container. Read the review below:

Amazoncom

Kala Brown, 30, was found alive locked inside a container on Kohlhepp’s property last week. Police say the body of her boyfriend, Charles Carver, was also found on the property.
The couple had been missing since late August.
Police have not confirmed if the Amazon reviews are the work of Kohlhepp. However, they belong to an account with a wish list in Kohlhepp’s name, and The Daily Beast reports that the reviews mirror some of the activity on his now-deleted Facebook page.

Amazon

The dozens of reviews contain a mix of mundane comments, odd bits of humor and details that seem chilling in hindsight, if the account is truly that of a suspected serial killer.
Some of the reviews are several years old, while some are much newer ― including reviews for a “tactical pouch” and “shoulder pouch,” both intended for carrying ammunition. These were posted in August, just before Brown and Carver went missing. 
“Works great,” the review for the shoulder pouch states. The review for the tactical pouch notes that it’s good for some rounds but not others.
Kohlhepp is a registered sex offender who served 15 years for raping a 14-year-old girl in 1986, when he was 15, according to Fox Carolina. 
Since his release from prison he has gone into real estate, starting his own firm in Spartanburg, the Post and Courier reported. The newspaper said he bought a large tract of land and put a fence around it ― something neighbors found curious as that would keep game out and limit hunting. 
Now, police say several bodies have been found buried on that land, and they are looking for more. 
On Amazon, the account linked to Kohlhepp left a review for a shovel with a folding handle ― a product since deleted, but CBS News preserved a copy. “Keep in car for when you have to hide the bodies and you left the full size shovel at home,” it read.
