Paint The World Bleu
EDITION 
US
You can express yourself through the stroke of a brush.
 11/22/2017 03:43 pm ET Updated Dec 07, 2017 

Heath Gallery

I’ll never forget the feeling the first time I put myself on display. The people, the lights, the extreme nervousness, but most of all I’ll never forget that first compliment about my painting. Throughout my life, I’ve had the privilege to shadow exceptionally brilliant artists who have extraordinary talent. Coming from a household of artists, I’ve always had a yearning to create, but I didn’t know what I was searching for. As a minority growing up in a low-income environment, I did not have as many opportunities or the exposure to understand what art truly means.
As a minority growing up in a low-income environment, I did not have as many opportunities or the exposure to understand what art truly means.
Over time an idea developed inside me, an idea that you can express yourself through the stroke of a brush, through the capturing of an idea, a feeling, a moment in a medium ― be that paper, canvas, brick, or a computer screen. In that moment of epiphany my alter ego Bleu Pablo was born. Art has given me the ability to express who I am to the world. My paintings are an extension of myself and are my soul laid bare.

Title: Speed, Mediums: Acrylic and Spray, Paint on Canvas board Price: $175 (Sold), Size: 6 X 8

To put a single feeling or expression to one piece is to say I am only one feeling or expression; they are as complex and varied as I am. I am my art, and my art is me. Articulating my feelings and thoughts through my art has given me the ability to express myself to the world in a way I never could with words.
My goal is to create a platform, a safe space if you will, for emerging artists in the inner city to display their work. I want to give this generation and the ones to follow to have the opportunity to express themselves and empower each other through their work. Through sharing our cultures, experiences and ideas, we cultivate inspiration and grow a communal understanding of life in all its forms. I know it sounds corny, but I want us to create, innovate and motivate within ourselves and our peers.
Articulating my feelings and thoughts through my art has given me the ability to express myself to the world in a way I never could with words.
I owe my love of the arts to my creative family, especially my uncle Albert Wrighton who inspired me to give life to my canvas. When I first started and was unsure of my work he would tell me “Don’t stop. You will find yourself.” I feel I finally have done just that. Painting abstract art is my love ― as no other form allows you to draw love, happiness or despair as you see it. I describe my style as abstract with a touch of uptown sauce.
Contact me: bleupablo9@gmail.com

Title: Been so Long Mediums: Acrylic and Spray Paint on Canvas Board Price: Not for sale Size: 6 X 8


Title: Stay Cool, Mediums: Acrylic on Canvas, Price: Not for sale, Size: 8 X 12

Writing Cred: Thomas Morgan
