A Taste Of Hanukkah: 13 Festive And Delicious Recipes
Delicious to eat and fun to make, rugelach are miniature crescent-rolled pastries posing as cookies. They’re made by rolling a triangle of dough around a sweet filling of fruit, nuts, chocolate, or anything your heart desires. GET THE RECIPE
This wonderful brisket recipe was originally published in The Silver Palette New Basics Cookbook in 1989 — and is the world’s most Googled brisket recipe for good reason. GET THE RECIPE
Inspired by the flavors of Egypt, this salad contains crunchy pistachios, tangy pomegranate molasses, and cilantro, all balanced by warm, earthy spices and sweet golden raisins. Chunks of feta, scallions, and pomegranate seeds adorn the top of the dish, making a gorgeous composed salad with lively flavors and textures. GET THE RECIPE
Homemade applesauce is richly flavored, tart and sweet — almost like apple pie filling. Spoon a dollop over your latkes or offer for dessert. GET THE RECIPE
This traditional Jewish dish is made from egg noodles baked in a creamy custard. You’ll love the thick and crunchy cinnamon streusel. GET THE RECIPE 
Latkes are traditionally made on the stovetop but I prefer to fry them in the oven. They’re no healthier, mind you, but they’re just as good, half the mess, and so much easier. GET THE RECIPE
Matzo ball soup is traditional for Passover, but I make it on Hanukkah too. It’s a bit of a “potschke,” as my mother would say, but it’s not hard — you pretty much throw everything into a pot and forget it. And the secret to delicious, light, and fluffy matzo balls? Use a mix! GET THE RECIPE 
In this festive-looking dish, chicken is immersed in a honey, citrus, and chili-infused marinade, and then roasted with carrots and dates. Herbs, scallions and pistachios are added before serving for freshness, color, and crunch. GET THE RECIPE 
On Hanukkah, it’s traditional to eat foods fried in oil. While the word fritter usually conjures up something heavy and deep-fried, these zucchini pancakes are as light and delicate as can be. GET THE RECIPE
This easy roast chicken with herb butter is the perfect cozy dish for the holidays. Serve it with latkes, roasted carrots and applesauce. GET THE RECIPE
Fragrant spices, bright colors, sweet and savory flavors — this Moroccan salad is a feast for the senses. It’s essentially an exotic twist on the classic carrot-raisin salad, yet you don’t need any exotic ingredients to make it. The magic is made with spices you likely already have in your spice cabinet. GET THE RECIPE
My Grandma Annie made the world’s best mandel bread, a traditional Jewish cookie similar to biscotti. Serve them with coffee, milk, or hot chocolate while playing a game of dreidel. GET THE RECIPE
