21 Great Things To Make With Overripe Bananas
An overripe banana is a blessing, not a curse.
As part of HuffPost’s “Reclaim” project, HuffPost Taste will focus on simple ways you can reduce food waste in your own home.
Of all the produce that can go bad in the kitchen, the banana is the only one to get excited about. Overripe strawberries and peaches are destined for the compost bin, but overripe bananas provide you with the possibility of many great recipes. They’re really a blessing, not a curse.
Banana bread wouldn’t be possible without overripe bananas. And that’s not all. Pancakes, smoothies, milkshakes and more are made more irresistible thanks to a banana that’s a few days old. We gathered 21 recipes that back up our claim. Check them out.
 1 Grilled Banana Bread Peanut Butter S'more With Vanilla Marshmallows 
 

 
 Half Baked Harvest 
 Get the Grilled Banana Bread Peanut Butter S'more With Vanilla Marshmallows recipe from Half Baked Harvest
 
 
 2 Banana Bread Pancakes 
 

 
 Foodie Crush 
 Get the Banana Bread Pancakes recipe from Foodie Crush
 
 
 3 Caramelized Banana Upside Down Cake 
 

 
 Averie Cooks 
 Get the Caramelized Banana Upside Down Cake recipe from Averie Cooks
 
 
 4 Banana Vanilla Soft Serve With Dark Chocolate Drizzle 
 

 
 This Rawsome Life 
 Get the Banana Vanilla Soft Serve with Dark Chocolate Drizzle recipe from The Rawsome Life
 
 
 5 Moist And Chewy Banana Oatmeal Cookies 
 

 
 Life Love And Sugar 
 Get the Moist and Chewy Banana Oatmeal Cookies recipe by Life Love And Sugar
 
 
 6 Cream Cheese-Filled Banana Bread 
 

 
 Averie Cooks 
 Get the Cream Cheese-Filled Banana Bread recipe from Averie Cooks
 
 
 7 Coconut Banana Cream Chocolate Truffle Pie With Dulce de Leche 
 

 
 Half Baked Harvest 
 Get the Coconut Banana Cream Chocolate Truffle Pie With Dulce de Leche recipe from Half Baked Harvest
 
 
 8 Strawberry Banana Colada Smoothie 
 

 
 Half Baked Harvest 
 Get the Strawberry Banana Colada Smoothie recipe from Half Baked Harvest
 
 
 9 Banana And Chocolate Chip Baked French Toast 
 

 
 Foodie Crush 
 Get the Banana And Chocolate Chip Baked French Toast recipe from Foodie Crush
 
 
 10 Banana Oatmeal Chocolate Chip Cookies 
 

 
 Averie Cooks 
 Get the Banana Oatmeal Chocolate Chip Cookies recipe from Averie Cooks
 
 
 11 Banana Pudding Cheesecake 
 

 
 Life Love And Sugar 
 Get the Banana Pudding Cheesecake recipe from Life Love And Sugar
 
 
 12 Banana Cream Pie Blizzards 
 

 
 Minimalist Baker 
 Get the Banana Cream Pie Blizzards recipe from Minimalist Baker
 
 
 13 Banana Slow Cooker Oats 
 

 
 Erin Clarke of Well Plated 
 Get the Banana Slow Cooker Oats recipe from Well Plated
 
 
 14 Banana Bread With Greek Yogurt Frosting 
 

 
 The Clever Carrot 
 Get the Banana Bread With Greek Yogurt Frosting recipe from The Clever Carrot
 
 
 15 Banana Milkshake 
 

 
 Someday Spoon 
 Get the Banana Milkshake recipe from Someday Spoon
 
 
 16 Peanut Butter Banana Cookies 
 

 
 Gimme Some Oven 
 Get the Peanut Butter Banana Cookies recipe from Gimme Some Oven
 
 
 17 Banana Zucchini Chocolate Chip Muffins 
 

 
 Averie Cooks 
 Get the Banana Zucchini Chocolate Chip Muffins recipe from Averie Cooks
 
 
 18 Chocolate Chip Banana Bread Waffles 
 

 
 Minimalist Baker 
 Get the Chocolate Chip Banana Bread Waffles recipe from Minimalist Baker
 
 
 19 Peanut Butter Banana Cake With Chocolate Peanut Butter Frosting 
 

 
 Desserts With Benefits 
 Get the Peanut Butter Banana Cake With Chocolate Peanut Butter Frosting recipe by Desserts With Benefits
 
 
 20 Fudgy Banana Bars With Vanilla Bean Browned Butter Glaze 
 

 
 Averie Cooks 
 Get the Fudgy Banana Bars with Vanilla Bean Browned Butter Glaze recipe from Averie Cooks
 
 
 21 Roasted Banana Cake 
 

 
 The Faux Martha 
 Get the Roasted Banana Cake recipe from The Faux Martha
 
 
 Take Action Now 
 Join thousands of Americans calling on Congress to pass Rep. Pingree's Food Recovery Act.
