12 Furniture Stores Like IKEA To Buy Minimalist Home Decor
We’re not hating on IKEA, but they aren’t the only ones doing minimalist modern home decor right. Although IKEA’s prices are hard to beat, we’ve found some awesome alternatives at every price point that will have you saying, “IKEA who?”
Get creative with your modern aesthetic and check out these 12 alternative furniture stores to buy minimalist home decor.
 
A post shared by etsy (@etsy) on Nov 7, 2017 at 7:07am PST
 
 Etsy is home to thousands of vendors that specialize in simplistic living and minimalist home decor. They even have a "clean and simple" landing page that makes navigating their modern finds seamless.
 
 
 
A post shared by 2modern (@2modern) on Sep 12, 2017 at 7:58pm PDT
 
 2Modern is all about authentic, thoughtfully created modern design. They're a bit on the higher-end when it comes to their bigger pieces of furniture, but trust that it's worth the investment.
 
 
 
A post shared by LexMod Furniture (@lexmodfurniture) on Nov 16, 2017 at 6:52am PST
 
 If you're looking for fairly affordable modern home decor, LexMod is where it's at. We're in love with how well they do modern comfort. While minimalist home design gets a bad rap for being cold and sterile, LexMod adds some warmth to the modern home decor space.
 
 
 
A post shared by Apt2B (@apt2b) on Oct 3, 2017 at 7:15pm PDT
 
 Whether you're looking for a vintage bar cart, backless barstool, or credenza, Apt2B brings you more style for less money. With free white-glove delivery, 100-day returns, and USA-made sofas, you can't beat this minimalist home decor option.
 
 
 
A post shared by Target Style (@targetstyle) on Oct 24, 2017 at 5:41pm PDT
 
 Target has always been a one-stop shop for simple home decor. But with the addition of their new home line Project 62, minimalist furniture just got even easier to shop for. With prices that are as competitive as IKEA and furniture that's meant for small-space living, you shouldn't be sleeping on Project 62.
 
 
 
A post shared by AllModern (@allmodern) on Nov 27, 2017 at 2:05pm PST
 
 AllModern is within the Wayfair, Birch Lane, and Joss & Main family, meaning it's extremely affordable. They offer chic, trendy options at crazy good prices so you can play around with your minimalist look without the hefty price tag.
 
 
 
A post shared by Urban Outfitters Home (@urbanoutfittershome) on Nov 29, 2017 at 5:33pm PST
 
 Urban recently started focusing on small-space living, meaning their pieces are simplified and designed to not overwhelm. Their items are a bit pricier, so we suggest splurging on one item like a velvet couch or glass bar cart to really pull together your minimalist look.
 
 
 
A post shared by H&M Home (@hm_home) on Jul 27, 2017 at 11:32pm PDT
 
 If you're renting or simply want to save on simplified home decor, H&M home is a seriously affordable option. They have almost everything under the sun in terms of home accessories, so if you're looking for easy ways to spruce up your living room, kitchen, or bedroom on a dime, look no further.
 
 
 
A post shared by Fab (@fab) on Apr 10, 2017 at 8:34am PDT
 
 Minimalism doesn't mean boring and dull, but carefully curated room decor. That's why we love Fab. Their style is modern yet funky, giving you a chance to add that one piece of furniture that will elevate any room's minimalist aesthetic.
 
 
 
A post shared by CB2 (@cb2) on Nov 12, 2017 at 6:24pm PST
 
 Cb2, Crate and Barrel's younger, more affordable, and (shh!) trendier sibling, is modern furniture for your apartment, loft, and home. Their design palette has always been a mix of minimalism and mid-century modern, so there's a lot of room to mix and match for optimal style.
 
 
 
A post shared by hayneedle (@hayneedle) on Nov 12, 2017 at 5:30pm PST
 
 While you might have not thought of Hayneedle as a destination for minimalist home decor, think again. I like to think of Hayneedle as the furniture brand that's both cozy and modern, two words you don't usually pair together. With warmer notes throughout their pieces, you can shop minimalist home decor and not have to compromise on that home-y feel.
 
 
 
A post shared by Design Within Reach (@designwithinreach) on Aug 15, 2017 at 5:06pm PDT
 
 Design Within Reach is our priciest swap-in for minimalist furniture stores like IKEA. Though, you're getting quality pieces of furniture that won't go out of style, no matter what's currently trending. Similar to our suggestion with Urban Outfitters, splurge on one item and make it the centerpiece of your modern abode.
 
 
HuffPost may receive a share from purchases made via links on this page.
