Twitter Is Concerned Ryan Seacrest Is Coming For All Of Our Jobs
But seriously, when does the new "Live" co-host sleep?
On Monday, Kelly Ripa announced that Ryan Seacrest would be her new “Live! with Kelly” co-host, replacing Michael Strahan after he left for “Good Morning America” in May of last year. 
Seacrest is a surprising choice for co-host, only because he’s one of the busiest people in the media business today. 
The former “American Idol” host is a producer on “Keeping Up with the Kardashians,” hosts a radio show, is a staple on the on the red carpet during award season, and is ABC’s annual New Year’s Eve host since taking over duties from the late Dick Clark. If that wasn’t enough, the CW announced in January that it picked up a new scripted pilot from Ryan Seacrest Productions called “Insatiable,” which is, well, a good description of Seacrest. 
Yes, the 42-year-old is an incredibly busy guy ― something that was not lost on Twitter users, who couldn’t help pointing out that Seacrest might have his hands full.
Let me hurry up and get to work before I show up late and find Ryan Seacrest at my desk.
— Kung Fu Kenny G (@whitt_writes) May 1, 2017
I need a Ryan Seacrest work ethic!
— a (@oohlalamandy) May 1, 2017
Oh good @RyanSeacrest got another job, I was concerned he only had 6
— Warren Dean (@CTVwdean) May 1, 2017
Kelly better watch her back. Remember what happened the last time Ryan Seacrest was someone's cohost?
— J. Tubz (@TubbyFiasco) May 1, 2017
If Ryan Seacrest gave up half of his jobs, he alone could fix the unemployment rate.
— Alexandra Fernandez (@FERNalicious) May 1, 2017
Republicans keep blaming immigrants when it's really Ryan Seacrest taking all their jobs.
— Ashley C. Ford (@iSmashFizzle) May 1, 2017
@USATODAY Geeze @RyanSeacrest! How many jobs does one man need? Do you ever sleep?
— Paula Cook (@907Momma) May 1, 2017
Why is the unemployment rate dropping? Because Ryan Seacrest is taking all the jobs. #LiveWithKelly
— Marcos Suazo (@MrMSuazo) May 1, 2017
