Watch: Real-Life Heroes Thwart ISIS-Inspired Terror Attack in Clint Eastwood's 'The 15:17 to Paris'
Watch: Real-Life Heroes Thwart ISIS-Inspired Terror Attack in Clint Eastwood’s ‘The 15:17 to Paris’
 13 Dec, 2017
 20 Dec, 2017
 
Warner Bros. released the first trailer for Clint Eastwood’s real-life drama The 15:17 to Paris, which is based on and stars the actual heroes who thwarted the ISIS-inspired terror attack in 2015 in which a gunman opened fire on a high-speed train traveling to Paris.
The thrilling visuals reveal years of life struggles and triumphs of three Americans — Anthony Sadler, Oregon National Guardsman Aleksander Skarlatos, and former U.S. Airman Spencer Stone — that led to the day they decided to launch a heroic effort to stop an Ak-47-wielding attacker, saving countless lives.
Eastwood presented Sadler, Skarlatos, and Stone — who became international stars for their heroic efforts — with the “Hero Award” at the 2016 Guys Choice Awards in June.
“I’m such a huge Clint Eastwood fan. I’ve seen all of his movies growing up,” Skarlatos told People magazine last June. “Actually meeting him in person, having him give us the award. Then we talked with him for like 10 minutes afterwards. It was one of the coolest experiences that has happened to us so far.”
Sadler and Skarlatos appeared on Breitbart News Daily last November to discuss their book and how the story in it comes to life on the screen.
“The narrative is often, ‘Oh, yeah, the military is why these guys were able to do that,’ but I think the book portrays us as just the three regular friends, twenty-something friends that we were, and that we were just put in an extraordinary situation,” Sadler said. “The circumstances just kind of fell into place where we were able to act and not only save ourselves, but everybody else.”
It’s just made me kind of, I guess, a little bit more worldly and appreciative of the United States because, I mean, honestly, Europe is going through a lot of issues right now, especially France, and I guess it’s just made me appreciate what I have here more because the rest of the world has it a lot rougher than we do, in a lot of ways,” Skarlatos added.
The highly-anticipated drama marks Eastwood’s third director-producer partnership with Warner Bros., after blockbuster hits in 2016’s Oscar-nominated Sully and 2014’s American Sniper.
The feature also stars Jenna Fischer, Judy Greer, Tony Hale, Jaleel White, and Ray Corasani.
The 15:17 to Paris rides into theaters on Feb. 9.
Follow Jerome Hudson on Twitter @jeromeehudson
