Gemini Horoscopes: Daily, Love & Monthly Forecast
2018 might begin on a high note for you as it relates to the money you earn from your profession. A stunning Full Moon will fall in your earned income sector on January 1. This lunation sends positive beams to Mars and Jupiter, now moving through your work sector, as well as to inspirational Neptune, now at the top of your chart in your 10th House of Career. This is amazing, supportive energy that denotes fulfillment rather than loss. Emotionally, you might feel more gratified than ever in your capacity to use your special talents in a way that is appreciated by others, and also invites cash to flow your way. If you are considering working to make money using any of your imaginative or spiritually-related talents, this energy will be even more lucrative for you. Go for it! The only thing standing in your way during this time might be the feeling that shining your light brighter might trigger some type of insecurity or even power struggle in your relationship. As the year begins it's very possible that your partner is not experiencing the same type of professional or financial gratification as you, and because of this, you might feel tempted to dim your light in an effort to salvage your partner's pride. This would be a mistake. Pushing yourself down is not the answer. Instead, reassure your partner that you're fully supporting him or her through their shift in direction, but you're going to do this by lifting yourself up. In the process, you will lift up your mate. In fact, a glorious new opportunity might emerge for him or her near the New Moon on January 16. This might not be permanent or completely stable, and yes, it might be uncomfortable, but try to reassure your love that the only way to grow is to embrace change. Moving forward -- even if it's on shaky ground -- is better than being swallowed up by the ground as it collapses. 
 There might not be much playful romance this month, but you and your partner will surely be paying attention to your bottom line. Joint finances are a certain focus thanks to a flurry of planetary activity across your 8th House of Shared Resources. Until January 17 you'll have Venus moving through this part of your chart, so it's possible that your partner will receive good financial news about his or her earnings -- especially near January 3. A generous raise or bonus is possible, and if that happens, it'll surely be mutually beneficial. From January 11-13 you and your sweetheart will have a realistic conversation about money. This might initially be uncomfortable since it will require you both to recognize your limitations and also come to an agreement on long-term financial goals. The tricky part will be navigating past one of you having a more frugal or even hoarding mentality, while the other appears quite the opposite. Again, reconciling these extremes might be tricky, but it's not insurmountable. A powerful New Moon on January 16 will help. Single? After the 17th you might meet someone at school if you're studying for an advanced degree or, it's possible that you'll encounter someone who captivates you through spiritual studies (literally meeting someone at church or other place of worship) or as you travel abroad. One way or another, romantic possibilities are much more open by the end of the month. Someone might even declare his or her feelings for you on the 31st. You'll love what you hear! 
 ADVERTISEMENT 
Sign up for HuffPost Horoscopes
There's a lot going on in your life right now. Get insight into what it all means with your daily horoscope.
