These Are The 26 Most Sexually Healthy Colleges
The annual ranking finds most campuses are making significant improvements.

Trojan

Colleges have vastly improved sexual health on their campuses over the past decade, according to a new report from Trojan Brand Condoms. 
Trojan has released an annual sexual health report card since 2006, ranking colleges on how well they provide sexual health information and resources on campus. This year, Trojan announced Wednesday that Oregon State University ranked No. 1 for the second year in a row.
But overall, the company notes all campuses have made big improvements. 
The annual report card has examined schools using a GPA-like score for sexual health, based on a 4.0 scale, Trojan says. In 2006, the first year, average score was just 1.9; this year, the average GPA is 3.0.
So while Columbia University has slipped from No. 2 in 2013 to eighth place this year, it may not be because the Ivy League school is doing worse, but the competition is getting stiffer. 

Aerial shot of Oregon State University's campus.

Stanford University, the University of Georgia, the University of Michigan and Brown University all followed Oregon State to round out the top five in the 2015 ranking.
Columbia, Brown and the University of Iowa have each appeared in the top 10 of the ranking at least seven times since Trojan created the report card. 
The ranking of 140 schools is done by the research firm, Sperling's BestPlaces, using data from student health center representatives and follow-up secondary research on those centers and services they provide. Availability of contraceptives for free or at cost, HIV and STI testing, outreach programs and hours of operation are all considered for the ranking. 
The Top 26 Colleges With The Best Sexual Health, Ranked By Trojan:
Oregon State University
Stanford University
University of Georgia
University of Michigan-Ann Arbor
Brown University
University of Oregon
University of Iowa
Columbia University
The University of Texas at Austin
University of Arizona
Michigan State University
Indiana University-Bloomington
Princeton University
University of Maryland-College Park
Colorado State University
Cornell University
University of Florida
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
University of Connecticut
Northwestern University
University of Pennsylvania
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of Wisconsin-Madison
University at Buffalo
Rutgers University-New Brunswick
University of Nebraska at Lincoln
______
Know something we don't? Contact us at college@huffingtonpost.com. 
______
