GOP Senator Makes ACORN-Obamacare Connection
1.8k 
1.7k
Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas) said Wednesday that former members of the organization ACORN were hired as Obamacare navigators, or people tasked with helping uninsured Americans get health insurance through the Affordable Care Act.
"We've already heard some anecdotal reports about Obamacare navigators, including a woman who had an outstanding arrest warrant at the time she was hired, along with former members of an organization known as ACORN that's had its own share of problems with corruption and lawbreaking," he said in a speech on the Senate floor Wednesday. "These people will be allowed to collect some of the most sensitive personal information that we have as Americans."
The navigators have attracted conservative attention for potentially violating privacy laws. However, as ThinkProgress notes, states can enact additional privacy restrictions for Obamacare navigators and federal rules require navigators to receive 20 hours of training, which includes information about privacy rules, and imposes fines of up to $25,000 for confidentiality violations.
Cornyn appears to be referencing a Foxnews.com story with the headline, "Ex-ACORN operatives helping roll out ObamaCare."
The Huffington Post's Zach Carter reported that ACORN dissolved in early 2010 amid allegations from conservatives that proved to be unfounded:
ACORN, also known as the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, came under heavy fire in the fall of 2009 after conservative videographer James O'Keefe released a set of selectively edited videos that appeared to show its employees offering advice on tax avoidance related to prostitution and child smuggling. Independent investigations by the California attorney general, the Massachusetts attorney general and the Brooklyn, N.Y., district attorney would later clear ACORN of criminal wrongdoing, and an investigation by the Government Accountability Office would clear ACORN of charges that it mishandled federal funds.
But in the fall of 2009, Congress banned federal funding for ACORN using broad language that applied to "any organization" that had been charged with breaking federal or state election laws, lobbying disclosure laws or campaign finance laws or with filing fraudulent paperwork with any federal or state agency. The funding ban also extended to any employees, contractors or others affiliated with any group so charged.
ALSO ON HUFFPOST:


Lies And Distortions Of The Health Care Debate

Lies And Distortions Of The Health Care Debate
 1 / 12 
Healthcare In America Is Already 'The Best In The World'
One of the more positive sounding admonitions from health care reform opponents was that the United States had "the best health care in the world," so why would you mess with it? Well, it's true that if you want the experience the pinnacle of medical care, you come to the United States. And if you want the pinnacle of haute cuisine, you go to Per Se. If you want the pinnacle of commercial air travel, you get a first class seat on British Airways. Now, naturally, you wouldn't let just anyone mess with someone's tasting menu or state-of-the-art air-beds. But like anything that's "the best," the best health care in the world isn't for everybody. The costs are prohibitively high, the access is prohibitively exclusive, and the resources are prohibitively scarce. What do the people in America who "fly coach" in the health care system get? Well, at the time of the health care reform debate, they were participating in a system that was, by all objective measurements,  -- if you were lucky enough to be participating in it. As anyone who's fortunate enough to have employer based health care or unfortunate enough to have a pre-existing condition can tell you, health care for ordinary people already involved all of those things that we were told would be a feature of the Affordable Care Act -- long waits, limited choice, and rationing. When the , the top marks in the surveyed categories went to the United Kingdom, New Zealand and the Netherlands. Ezra Klein examined the study, and : "The issue isn't just that we don't have universal health care. Our delivery system underperforms, too. 'Even when access and equity measures are not considered, the U.S. ranks behind most of the other countries on most measures. With the inclusion of primary care physician survey data in the analysis, it is apparent that the U.S. is lagging in adoption of national policies that promote primary care, quality improvement, and information technology.'"
Getty
