Healthy Breakfast Masterpieces To Get You In The Halloween Spirit
luvlifelift/Instagram

 670 
It's a big week for the pumpkin. With National Pumpkin Day on October and 26 and Halloween not far behind, fans of the gourd are stocking up on their favorite pumpkin-flavored treats.
The problem is, many of those treats are high in sugar and low in actual pumpkin, which boasts benefits like fiber, antioxidants and potassium.
Instead of celebrating Halloween with nutritionally-scary treats, add some festive cheer to the foods you already know are good for you. These morning meals are nutritious, tasty and satisfying -- and will definitely get you in the Halloween spirit!
Apple Bites
 Made from apples and almonds, these monstrous mouths pack fiber and healthy fats. Try them with cheese for teeth or atop a bed of yogurt for some extra calcium and protein, like in this recipe. 
Loading
 #applemouth #cheeseteeth 
Ghost Bananas
Tangerine Pumpkins
 For an extra serving of fruit, pair your ghost with a citrusy "pumpkin" topped with a celery stem. You'll get fiber, antioxidants and of course vitamin C from that tangerine or mandarin orange. 
Loading
Egg Eyes
 It doesn't get much healthier than eggs for breakfast, with their protein, choline and carotenoids. Sunny-side up fans can get creative with the help of a little ketchup or hot sauce. Bonus points for attention to detail if you top that yolk off with a black olive and green pea like in this recipe.
 
Fruit Salad Jack-O'-Lantern
 Hollow out an orange, carve it a sinister face and then fill it to the brim with a mix of your favorite fruit for a wide range of vitamins and some filling fiber.
 
Candy Corn Smoothie Or Parfait
 Give your typical calcium- and protein-rich yogurt or smoothie a festive makeover with some candy corn-inspired add-ins. Try pureed pumpkin and cocoa powder, or banana, papaya and pineapple like in this recipe.
 
Mummy Toast
 Top some 100 percent whole grain toast with a few small slices of your favorite cheese (protein and calcium!), then finish your creature from the crypt with halved black olives for eyes, like in this recipe.
